

===== 1743571353904.txt =====

﻿Harmonized Commodity 
Description and Coding System 

EXPLANATORY NOTES 
Sixth edition (2017) 

VOLUME 5 
Sections XVI — XXI 

Chapters 85 — 97 

WORLD CUSTOMS ORGANIZATION 
(Established in 1952 as the Customs Co-operation Council) 

Rue du Marche, 30 
B-1210 Brussels — Belgium 

Telephone +32 (0) 2 209.92.11	Fax +32 (0) 2 209.94.92 



• 

• 

• 



• 85 

Chapter 85 

Electrical machinery and equipment and parts thereof; 
sound recorders and reproducers, 

television image and sound recorders and reproducers, and 
parts and accessories of such articles 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Electrically warmed blankets, bed pads, foot-muffs or the like; electrically warmed clothing, 
footwear or ear pads or other electrically warmed articles worn on or about the person; 

(b) Articles of glass of heading 70.11; 

• (c) Machines and apparatus of heading 84.86; 

(d) Vacuum apparatus of a kind used in medical, surgical, dental or veterinary sciences 
(heading 90.18); or 

(e) Electrically heated furniture of Chapter 94. 

2.- Headings 85.01 to 85.04 do not apply to goods described in heading 85.11, 85.12, 85.40, 85.41 
or 85.42. 

However, metal tank mercury arc rectifiers remain classified in heading 85.04. 

3.- For the purposes of heading 85.07, the expression "electric accumulators" includes those presented 
with ancillary components which contribute to the accumulator's function of storing and supplying 
energy or protect it from damage, such as electrical connectors, temperature control devices (for 
example, thermistors) and circuit protection devices. They may also include a portion of the 
protective housing of the goods in which they are to be used. 

4.- Heading 85.09 covers only the following electro-mechanical machines of the kind commonly used for 
domestic purposes : 

(a) Floor polishers, food grinders and mixers, and fruit or vegetable juice extractors, of any weight; 

(b) Other machines provided the weight of such machines does not exceed 20 kg. 

The heading does not, however, apply to fans or ventilating or recycling hoods incorporating a fan, 
whether or not fitted with filters (heading 84.14), centrifugal clothes-dryers (heading 84.21), dish 
washing machines (heading 84.22), household washing machines (heading 84.50), roller or other 
ironing machines (heading 84.20 or 84.51), sewing machines (heading 84.52), electric scissors 
(heading 84.67) or to electrothermic appliances (heading 85.16). 

5.- For the purposes of heading 85.23 : 

(a) "Solid-state non-volatile storage devices" (for example, "flash memory cards" or "flash electronic 
storage cards") are storage devices with a connecting socket, comprising in the same housing one 
or more flash memories (for example, "FLASH E2PROM") in the form of integrated circuits 
mounted on a printed circuit board. They may include a controller in the form of an integrated 
circuit and discrete passive components, such as capacitors and resistors; 

(b) The term "smart cards" means cards which have embedded in them one or more electronic 
integrated circuits (a microprocessor, random access memory (RAM) or read-only memory 
(ROM)) in the form of chips. These cards may contain contacts, a magnetic stripe or an embedded 
antenna but do not contain any other active or passive circuit elements. 

XVI-85-1 



  

85 • 
6.- For the purposes of heading 5.34 "printed circuits" are circuits obtained by forming on an insulating 

base, by any printing proces (for example, embossing, plating-up, etching) or by the "film circuit" 
technique, conductor eleme ts, contacts or other printed components (for example, inductances, 
resistors, capacitors) alone r interconnected according to a pre-established pattern, other than 
elements which can produ e, rectify, modulate or amplify an electrical signal (for example, 
semiconductor elements). 

The ejcpression "printed circ its" does not cover circuits combined with elements other than those 
obtained during the printing process, nor does it cover individual, discrete resistors, capacitors or 
inductances. Pnnted circuits ay, however, be fitted with non-printed connecting elements. 

Thin-or thick-film circuits comprising passive and active elements obtained during the same 
technological process are to e classified in heading 85.42. 

7.- For the purpose of heading :5.36, "connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables" 
means connectors that simpl mechanically align optical fibres end to end in a digital line system. 
They perform no other functi n, such as the amplification, regeneration or modification of a signal. 

8.- Heading 85.37 does not incl e cordless infrared devices for the remote control of television receivers 
or other electrical equipment heading 85.43). 

9.- For th purposes of headings 85.41 and 85.42 : 

(a) "D,iodes,	transistors and imilar semiconductor devices" are semiconductor devices the operation 
of 'which depends on van tions in resistivity on the application of an electric field; 

(b) "Electronic integrated cir uits" are : 

Monolithic integrat d circuits in which the circuit elements (diodes, transistors, resistors, 
capacitors, inductan es, etc.) are created in the mass (essentially) and on the surface of a 
semiconductor or c mpound semiconductor material (for example, doped silicon, gallium 
arsenide, silicon ge anium, indium phosphide) and are inseparably associated; 

(ii) Hybrid integrated ci rcuits in which passive elements (resistors, capacitors, inductances, etc.), 
obtained by thin- or thick-film technology, and active elements (diodes, transistors, 
monolithic integrates circuits, etc.), obtained by semiconductor technology, are combined to 
all intents and purp ses indivisibly, by interconnections or interconnecting cables, on a single 
insulating substrata (glass, ceramic, etc.). These circuits may also include discrete 
components; 

(iii) Multichip integrates circuits consisting of two or more interconnected monolithic integrated 
circuits combined t all intents and purposes indivisibly, whether or not on one or more 
insulating substrate , with or without leadframes, but with no other active or passive circuit 
elements. 

(iv) Multi-component tegrated circuits (MC0s) : a combination of one or more monolithic, 
hybrid, or multi-ch p integrated circuits with at least one of the following components : 
silicon-based sens rs, actuators, oscillators, resonators or combinations thereof, or 
components perfo ing the functions of articles classifiable under heading 85.32, 85.33, 
85.41, or inductor classifiable under heading 85.04, formed to all intents and purposes 
indivisibly into a s' gle body like an integrated circuit, as a component of a kind used for 
assembly onto a pn ted circuit board (PCB) or other carrier, through the connecting of pins, 
leads, balls, lands, ps, or pads. 

For the purpose of t is definition : 

1. "Components" ay be discrete, manufactured independently then assembled onto the rest 
of the MCO, or ntegrated into other components. 

2. "Silicon based" means built on a silicon substrate, or made of silicon materials, or 
manufactured o to integrated circuit die. 

XVI-85-2 



85 

3. (a) "Silicon based sensors" consist of microelectronic or mechanical structures that are 
created in the mass or on the surface of a semiconductor and that have the function 
of detecting physical or chemical quantities and transducing these into electric 
signals, caused by resulting variations in electric properties or displacement of a 
mechanical structure. "Physical or chemical quantities" relates to real world 
phenomena, such as pressure, acoustic waves, acceleration, vibration, movement, 
orientation, strain, magnetic field strength, electric field strength, light, radioactivity, 
humidity, flow, chemicals concentration, etc. 

(b) "Silicon based actuators" consist of microelectronic and mechanical structures that 
are created in the mass or on the surface of a semiconductor and that have the 
function of converting electrical signals into physical movement. 

(c) "Silicon based resonators" are components that consist of microelectronic or 
mechanical structures that are created in the mass or on the surface of a 
semiconductor and have the function of generating a mechanical or electrical 
oscillation of a predefined frequency that depends on the physical geometry of these 
structures in response to an external input. 

(d) "Silicon based oscillators" are active components that consist of microelectronic or 
mechanical structures that are created in the mass or on the surface of a 
semiconductor and that have the function of generating a mechanical or electrical 
oscillation of a predefined frequency that depends on the physical geometry of these 
structures. 

For the classification of the articles defined in this Note, headings 85.41 and 85.42 shall take 
precedence over any other heading in the Nomenclature, except in the case of heading 85.23, which 
might cover them by reference to, in particular, their function. 

10.- For the purposes of heading 85.48, "spent primary cells, spent primary batteries and spent electric 
accumulators" are those which are neither usable as such because of breakage, cutting-up, wear or 
other reasons, nor capable of being recharged. 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Note. 

1.- Subheading 8527.12 covers only cassette-players with built-in amplifier, without built-in 
loudspeaker, capable of operating without an external source of electric power and the dimensions of 
which do not exceed 170 mm x 100 mm x 45 mm. 

XVI-85-3 



85 • 
GENERAL 

(A) SCOP AND STRUCTURE OF THE CHAPTER 

This Chapter covers all electri al machinery and equipment, other than : 
(a) Machinery and appara of a kind covered by Chapter 84, which remains classified there even 

if electric (see the Gene 1 Explanatory Note to that Chapter). 

and (b) Certain goods excludes from the Section as a whole (see the General Explanatory Note to 
Section XVI). 

Contrary to the rules in Cha ter 84, the goods of this Chapter remain classified here, even if 
they are of ceramic materials or glass, with the exception of glass envelopes (including bulbs 
and tubes) of heading 70.11. 

This Chapter covers : 

(1) Machines and apparatus for the production, transformation or storage of electricity, e.g., 
generators, transformers, etc. (headings 85.01 to 85.04) and primary cells (heading 85.06) 
and accumulators (headi g 85.07). 

(2) Certain domestic applia es (heading 85.09), and shavers, hair clippers and hair-removing 
appliances (heading 85.1 ). 

(3) Certain machines and a pliances which depend for their operation on the properties or 
effects of electricity, uch as its electro-magnetic effects, heating properties, etc. 
(headings 85.05, 85.11 t 85.18, 85.25 to 85.31 and 85.43). 

(4) Instruments and applia ces for recording or reproducing sound; video recorders or 
reproducers; parts and ccessories for such instruments and appliances (headings 85.19 
to 85.22). 

(5) Recording media for s S nd or similar recording of other phenomena (including video 
recording media, but e luding photographic or cinematographic films of Chapter 37) 
(heading 85.23). 

(6) Certain electrical goods of generally used independently, but designed to play a particular 
role as components, in electrical equipment, e.g., capacitors (heading 85.32), switches, 
fuses, junction boxes, e c. (heading 85.35 or 85.36), lamps (heading 85.39), thermionic, 
etc., valves and tubes (heading 85.40), diodes, transistors and similar semiconductor 
devices (heading 85.41), electrical carbons (heading 85.45). 

(7) Certain articles and mat als which are used in electrical apparatus and equipment because 
of their conducting or i ulating properties, such as insulated electric wire and assemblies 
thereof (heading 85.44), insulators (heading 85.46), insulating fittings and metal conduit 
tubing with an interior i ulating lining (heading 85.47). 

In addition to the electrical g ods indicated above, the Chapter also covers permanent magnets, 
including those not yet magn tised, and permanent magnet work holders (heading 85.05). 

It should, however, be note that this Chapter covers only certain types of electro-thermic 
apparatus, e.g., furnaces, etc. (heading 85.14) and space heating equipment, domestic 
appliances, etc. (heading 85.1 ). 

XVI-85-4 



85 

It should be further noted that certain electronic memory modules (e.g., SIMMs (Single In-line 
Memory Modules) and DIMMs (Dual In-line Memory Modules)) which cannot be regarded 
as products of heading 85.23 or as multi-component integrated circuits (MCOs) of 
heading 85.42 (see Note 9 (b) (iv) to this Chapter), and do not have another individual 
function are to be classified by application of Note 2 to Section XVI as follows : 

(a) modules suitable for use solely or principally with automatic data processing machines are 
to be classified in heading 84.73 as parts of those machines, 

(b) modules suitable for use solely or principally with other specific machines or with a 
number of machines of the same heading are to be classified as parts of those machines 
or groups of machines, and 

(c) where it is not possible to determine principal use, the modules are to be classified in 
heading 85.48. 

In general, however, electrically heated apparatus falls in other Chapters (mainly in Chapter 84), for 
example : steam generating boilers and super-heated water boilers (heading 84.02), air conditioning 
machines (heading 84.15), roasting, distilling or other apparatus of heading 84.19, calendering or other 
rolling machines and cylinders therefor (heading 84.20), poultry incubators and brooders 
(heading 84.36), general purpose branding machines for wood, cork, leather, etc. (heading 84.79), 
medical apparatus (heading 90.18). 

• 

(B) PARTS 

As regards parts in general, see the General Explanatory Note to Section XVI. 
Non-electrical parts of the machines or apparatus of this Chapter are classified as follows : 

(i) Many are in fact articles falling in other Chapters (especially Chapter 84), for example, pumps 
and fans (heading 84.13 or 84.14), taps, cocks, etc. (heading 84.81), ball bearings 
(heading 84.82), transmission shafts, gearing, etc. (heading 84.83). 

(ii) Other non-electrical parts suitable for use solely or principally with a particular kind of electrical 
machine of this Chapter (or with a number of machines falling in the same heading) are to be 
classified with that machine (or those machines) or, if appropriate, in heading 85.03, 85.22, 85.29 
or 85.38. 

(iii) Other non-electrical parts fall in heading 84.87. 

XVI-85-5 



85.01 • 
85.01 - Electric motors and Li • nerators (excluding generating sets). 

8501.10 - Motors of output not exceeding 37.5 W 

8501.20 - Universal C/DC motors of an output exceeding 37.5 W 

- Other DC otors; DC generators : 

8501.31 - - Of an out ut not exceeding 750 W 

8501.32 - - Of an out ut exceeding 750 W but not exceeding 75 kW 

8501.33 - - Of an out ut exceeding 75 kW but not exceeding 375 kW 

8501.34 - - Of an out ut exceeding 375 kW 

8501.40 - Other AC otors, single-phase 

- Other AC otors, multi-phase : 

8501.51 - - Of an ou ut not exceeding 750 W 

8501.52 - - Of an ou ut exceeding 750 W but not exceeding 75 kW 

8501.53 - - Of an ou I i ut exceeding 75 kW 

- AC genera ors (alternators) : 

8501.61 - - Of an ou II. ut not exceeding 75 kVA 

8501.62 - - Of an ou lie ut exceeding 75 kVA but not exceeding 375 kVA 

8501.63 - - Of an ou ut exceeding 375 kVA but not exceeding 750 kVA 

8501.64 - - Of an ou ut exceeding 750 kVA 

(I) ELECTRIC MOTORS 

Electric motors are machine• for transforming electrical energy into mechanical power. This 
group includes rotary motors nd linear motors. 

(A) Rotary motors produce mechanical power in the form of a rotary motion. They are of 
many types and sizes acc rding to whether they operate on DC or AC, and according to the 
use or purpose for whic they are designed. The motor housing may be adapted to the 
circumstances in which she motor will operate (e.g., dust proof, drip proof or flame proof 
motors; non-rigid mount ngs for belt driven motors, or for motors which will be subject to 
much vibration). 

Many motors may inco orate a fan or other device for keeping the motor cool during 
running. 

With the exception of st rter motors for internal combustion engines (heading 85.11), the 
heading covers electric otors of all types from low power motors for use in instruments, 
clocks, time switches, se ing machines, toys, etc., up to large powerful motors for rolling 
mills, etc. 

XVI-8501-1 



• 85.01 

Motors remain classified here even when they are equipped with pulleys, with gears or gear 
boxes, or with a flexible shaft for operating hand tools. 

The heading includes "outboard motors", for the propulsion of boats, in the form of a unit 
comprising an electric motor, shaft, propeller and a rudder. 

Synchronous motors for clock movements are classified here even if equipped with gears; 
however such synchronous motors also associated with a clock train are excluded 
(heading 91.09). 

(B) Linear motors produce mechanical power in the form of a linear motion. 

Linear induction motors consist essentially of one or more primary members composed of 
magnetic circuits, generally laminated (stack of magnetic laminations), on which coils are 
arranged and of a secondary member, usually in the form of a plate or profile of copper or 
aluminium. 

These motors generate a propulsive force when the primary member is energised by 
applying an alternating current in the presence of the secondary. The two members are 
separated by an airgap, and the translational motion (one member remaining stationary 
while the other moves) is produced without mechanical contact. 

The characteristic features of linear induction motors vary according to the purpose for 
which they are designed : driving hovertrains (the primary members are carried in the 
vehicles and straddle a rail (secondary member) secured to the track); powering 
bulk-handling equipment (a secondary plate mounted underneath a wheeled trolley travels 
over a series of primary coils located between the rails); operating overhead conveyors 
(bogies fitted with primary members travel underneath a secondary profile); positioning 
vehicles in car parks or stores (secondary pallets are displaced by primary members set into 
the floor); controlling, e.g., piston pumps and valves this function may be performed by 
"polysolenoid" linear motors in which the shaft (secondary member) moves to and fro 
inside an annular primary member); positioning on machine-tools; etc. 

DC linear motors, whose operation uses the interaction of electro-magnets or of 
electro-magnets and permanent magnets, can be used as alternating or oscillating motors 
(e.g., for reciprocating pumps, weaving shuttle drives), stepper motors (e.g., small 
conveyors), etc. 

This group also includes : 

(1) Servomotors, presented separately, consisting essentially of an electric motor with 
speed-reducing gears and equipped with a power transmission device (e.g., lever, 
pulley) designed to adjust the variable position of a regulating control in a boiler, in a 
furnace or in other plant (and possibly provided with an emergency hand-wheel). 

(2) Self-synchronising units, with a stator carrying three windings angled at 120° and a 
rotor carrying a single winding connected to two slip rings, for use in pairs 
(synchrotransmitter and synchroreceiver), e.g., in telemetering or remote control 
systems. 

(3) Valve actuators, electrical, consisting of an electric motor with reducing gear and 
drive shaft and, in some cases, with various devices (electric starter, transformer, 
hand-wheel, etc.) to operate the valve plug. 

XVI-8501-2 



85.01 • 
I) ELECTRIC GENERATORS 

Machines that produce electr. cal power from various energy sources (mechanical, solar, etc.) 
are classified here, provided t ey are not more specifically covered by any other heading of the 
Nomenclature. 

There are two main classes, irect current (DC) generators (dynamos), and alternating current 
(AC) generators (alternators . In general, both consist essentially of a stator mounted in a 
housing, and a rotating mem er (the rotor) mounted inside the stator on a shaft driven by the 
prime mover. In the case of DC generators a commutator with segments is mounted on the 
rotorshaft. The current prod ced is collected by a system of carbon brushes which rub the 
commutator segments, and is ansferred to the external circuit. AC generators are in most cases 
brushless and the current whi h they produce is led off directly to the external circuit. In other 
AC generators the current is c llected by slip rings mounted on a rotorshaft and is transferred by 
a system of carbon brushes w ich rub the slip rings. 

The stator usually consists f a system of electromagnets, but for certain DC generators 
(magneto-electric generators) system of permanent magnets is used. The rotor usually consists 
of a system of coils of wire mounted on a laminated iron core; this system is known as the 
armature. In some AC genera rs the revolving portion is the field system. 

Electric generators may be h . nd- or pedal-operated, but usually they have prime movers (e.g., • 
hydraulic turbines, steam t rbines, wind engines, reciprocating steam engines, internal 
combustion piston engines). However, this heading only covers generators when presented 
without prime movers. 

The heading also covers pho ovoltaic generators consisting of panels of photocells combined 
with other apparatus, e.g., st a rage batteries and electronic controls (voltage regulator, inverter, 
etc.) and panels or modules quipped with elements, however simple (for example, diodes to 
control the direction of the c rrent), which supply the power directly to, for example, a motor, 
an electrolyser. 

In these devices, electricity s produced by means of solar cells which convert solar energy 
directly into electricity (phots oltaic conversion). 

The heading covers all electr c generators including large generators for power stations; small 
auxiliary generators used for exciting the windings of other generators; generators of various 
sizes and types used for supp ying current for a variety of purposes (e.g., on ships, on farms not 
connected to an external su e a ly, in chemical industries for electrolysis, and in diesel-electric 
trains). 
The heading also excludes : 

(a) Drums or rollers incorporati g an electric motor for belt or roller conveyors (heading 84.31). 

(b) Vibrator motors and electr -magnetic vibrators of heading 84.79 (see the Explanatory Note to that 
heading). 

(c) Electric generators combine, with prime movers (heading 85.02). 

(d) High tension generators (he ding 85.04). 

XVI-8501-3 



• 85.01 

(e) Primary cells and primary batteries (heading 85.06). 

(f) Generators (dynamos and alternators) used in conjunction with internal combustion engines, or for 
electrical lighting or signalling equipment of a kind used for cycles or motor vehicles 
(headings 85.11 and 85.12, respectively). 

(g) Solar cells whether or not assembled in modules or made up into panels but not equipped with 
elements, however simple, which supply the power directly to, for example, a motor, an electrolyser 
(heading 85.41). 

(h) Certain electrical apparatus sometimes known as generators which do not in fact produce electric 
energy, e.g., signal generators (heading 85.43). 

The generators of Chapter 90, for example, X-ray generators (heading 90.22); generators designed 
for demonstrational purposes and unsuitable for other uses (heading 90.23). 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the machines of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.03. 

XVI-8501-4 



85.02 • 
85.02 - Electric generating s s and rotary converters. 

- Generating sets with compression-ignition internal combustion piston 
engines (di sel or semi-diesel engines) : 

8502.11	 -- Of an ou ut not exceeding 75 kVA 

8502.12 - - Of an out ut exceeding 75 kVA but not exceeding 375 kVA 

8502.13 - - Of an ou .ut exceeding 375 kVA 

8502.20 - Generating sets with spark-ignition internal combustion piston engines 

- Other gene ating sets : 

8502.31 - - Wind-po ered 

8502.39 - - Other 

8502.40 - Electric ro ary converters 

(I) LECTRIC GENERATING SETS 

The expression "generating s ts" applies to the combination of an electric generator and any 
prime mover other than an electric motor (e.g., hydraulic turbines, steam turbines, wind 
engines, reciprocating steam ngines, internal combustion engines). Generating sets consisting 
of the generator and its prime over which are mounted (or designed to be mounted) together as 
one unit or on a common bas (see the General Explanatory Note to Section XVI), are classified 
here provided they are pre ented together (even if packed separately for convenience of 
transport). 

Electric generating sets for elding equipment are classified in this heading when presented 
separately, without their wel ing heads or welding appliances. However, they are excluded 
(heading 85.15) when presen ed together with their welding heads or welding appliances. 

(II) E ECTRIC ROTARY CONVERTERS 

These consist essentially of a ombination of an electric generator and a prime mover consisting 
of an electric motor permane tly mounted on a common base, though in certain cases the two 
functions are combined in ne unit with certain windings in common. They are used to 
transform the nature of the urrent (to convert from AC to DC or vice versa) or to change 
certain characteristics such a • the voltage, frequency or phase of alternating current (to convert, 
for example, the frequency f 50 to 200 cycles or to transform single phase to three phase 
current). Another type of rot converter (sometimes known as a rotary transformer) is used to 
convert DC from one voltage to another. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pr isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Sectio XVI), parts of the machines of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.03. 

XVI-8502-1 



• 85.03 

85.03 - Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the machines of heading 85.01 
or 85.02. 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI) this heading covers parts of the machines of the two 
preceding headings. The very wide range of parts classified here includes : 

(1) Shells and cases, stators, rotors, collector rings, collectors, brush-holders, excitation 
coils. 

(2) Electrical sheets and plates in shapes other than square or rectangular. 

XVI-8503-1 



85.04 • 
85.04 - Electrical transforme s, static converters (for example, rectifiers) and inductors. 

8504.10 - Ballasts fo discharge lamps or tubes 

- Liquid diel ctric transformers : 

8504.21 - - Having a power handling capacity not exceeding 650 kVA 

8504.22 - - Having a ower handling capacity exceeding 650 kVA but not exceeding 
10,000 k A 

8504.23 - - Having a power handling capacity exceeding 10,000 kVA 

- Other trap formers : 

8504.31 - - Having a power handling capacity not exceeding 1 kVA 

8504.32 - - Having power handling capacity exceeding 1 kVA but not exceeding 
16 kVA 

8504.33 - - Having power handling capacity exceeding 16 kVA but not exceeding 
500 kV 

8504.34 - - Having a power handling capacity exceeding 500 kVA 

8504.40 - Static con erters 

8504.50 - Other ind tors 

8504.90 - Parts 

(I) LECTRICAL TRANSFORMERS 

Electrical transformers are a paratus which, without having any moving parts, transform, by 
means of induction and usin a preset or adjustable system, an alternating current into another 
alternating current of differe i t voltage, impedance, etc. These usually consist of two or more 
coils of insulated wire woun in various configurations on laminated iron cores, although in 
some cases (e.g., radio-frequ ncy transformers) there may be no magnetic core, or the core may 
be of agglomerated iron dust, ferrite, etc. An AC in one coil (the primary circuit) induces an AC 
usually at different values of urrent and voltage in the others (the secondary circuit). In certain 
cases (auto transformers) the e is only a single coil, part of the winding of which is common to 
the primary and secondary ci cuits. In shell type transformers, there is a shell of laminated iron 
round the transformer. 

Certain transformers are de igned for particular purposes, e.g., matching transformers for 
matching the impedance of o e circuit with that of another, and instrument transformers (current 
or voltage transformers, co bined instrument transformers) used to step down or step up 
voltages or currents to the level of the connected equipment, e.g., measuring instruments, 
electricity meters or protectiv relays. 

The heading covers all trans ormers. They vary from ballasts for the control of the amount of 
current that flows through discharge lamps or tubes, small types used in wireless sets, 
instruments, toys, etc., to lar, e types enclosed in oil tanks or equipped with radiators, fans, etc., 
for cooling purposes.	T' e large types are used in electricity stations, stations for 
interconnecting mains, distr buting stations or sub-stations. The frequency may vary from 
mains frequencies up to ye high radio frequencies. The heading includes baluns (balancing 
units) which reduce electro- agnetic interference by balancing the impedance in paired lines. 

XVI-8504-1 



85.04 

• 
The power-handling capacity of a transformer is the kilovolt-ampere (kVA) output based on 
continual use at the rated secondary voltage (or amperage, when applicable) and at the rated 
frequency without exceeding the rated temperature limitations. 

Transformers for electric welding equipment presented separately without their welding heads 
or welding appliances are classified in this heading. However, they are excluded 
(heading 85.15) when presented together with their welding heads or welding appliances. 

The heading also covers induction coils, a kind of transformer in which an intermittent or 
fluctuating direct current in the primary induces a corresponding current in the secondary. They 
can be used either to step up the voltage to a higher value or, in the case of telephony, to 
reproduce in the secondary circuits a small fluctuating current corresponding to the fluctuation 
imposed on a steady DC in the primary. The heading covers induction coils of all kinds, other 
than ignition equipment for internal combustion engines (heading 85.11). 

(II) ELECTRICAL STATIC CONVERTERS 

The apparatus of this group are used to convert electrical energy in order to adapt it for further 
use. They incorporate converting.  elements (e.g., valves) of different types. They may also 

tir incorporate various auxiliary devices (e.g., transformers, induction coils, resistors, command 
regulators, etc.). Their operation is based on the principle that the converting elements act 
alternately as conductors and non-conductors. 

The fact that these apparatus often incorporate auxiliary circuits to regulate the voltage of the 
emerging current does not affect their classification in this group, nor does the fact that they are 
sometimes referred to as voltage or current regulators. 

This group includes : 

(A) Rectifiers by which alternating current (single or polyphase) is converted to direct current, 
generally accompanied by a voltage change. 

(B) Inverters by which direct current is converted to alternating current. 

(C) Alternating current converters and cycle converters by which alternating current 
(single or polyphase) is converted to a different frequency or voltage. 

(D) Direct current converters by which direct current is converted to a different voltage. 

Electrical static converters may be divided into the following principal categories according to 
the type of converting element with which they are equipped : 

(1) Semiconductor converters based on the one-way conductivity between certain crystals. 
Such converters consist of a semiconductor as the converting element and various other 
devices (e.g., coolers, tape conductors, drives, regulators, control circuits). 

These include : 

(a) Monocrystalline semiconductor rectifiers using, as a converting element, a device 
containing silicon or germanium crystals (diode, thyristor, transistor). 

(b) Polycrystalline semiconductor rectifiers using a selenium disc. 

XVI-8504-2 



85.04 • 
(2) Gas discharge converte s, such as : 

(a) Mercury arc rectifiers Their converting element consists of a glass envelope or a metal 
tank having a vacuu and containing a mercury cathode and one or more anodes 
through which the c rrent to be rectified passes. They are equipped with auxiliary 
devices, e.g., for pri ng, charging, cooling, and sometimes to maintain the vacuum. 

There are two cate ories of gas discharge rectifiers identifiable according to the 
mechanism of the p mer, viz., "excitrons" (with charging anodes) and "ignitrons" 
(with igniters). 

(b) Thermo-ionic rectifie s with incandescent cathodes. Their converting element (e.g., a 
thyratron) is similar to that of mercury arc rectifiers except that it contains an 
incandescent cathode in place of the mercury cathode. 

(3) Converters with a mec anical converting element based on the one-way conductivity of 
various contacts, such as 

(a) Contact rectifiers (e. ., those using camshafts) with a device whose metal contacts 
open and close in sy chronisation with the frequency of the alternating current to be 
rectified. e 

(b) Mercury jet turbine ectifiers with a rotating jet of mercury, synchronised with the 
frequency of the alte ating current, which strikes a fixed contact. 

(c) Vibrator rectifiers ith a thin metal tongue, oscillating at the frequency of the 
alternating current, hich touches a contact so placed that the current is drawn from 
the source. 

(4) Electrolytic rectifiers b sed on the principle that the combination of certain products used 
as electrodes in combi ation with certain liquids used as electrolytes will only allow 
current to flow in a singl direction. 

Electrical static converters m .1 be used for different purposes, e.g. : 

(1) Converters to supply el ctricity to drive stationary machines or electric traction vehicles 
(e.g., locomotives). 

(2) Supply converters, such as accumulator chargers (which consist essentially of rectifiers 
with associated transfo er and current control apparatus), converters for galvanising and 
electrolysis, emergenc power packs, converters for installations which supply 
high-tension direct curr nt, converters for heating purposes and for the current supply to 
electro-magnets. 

Also classified here are converters known as high-tension generators (used particularly 
with radio apparatus, e ission tubes, microwave tubes, ion-beam tubes) which convert the 
current from any source usually the mains, into the direct high-tension current necessary 
for feeding the equipme t concerned by means of rectifiers, transformers, etc. 

This heading also includes .tabilised suppliers (rectifiers combined with a regulator), e.g., 
uninterruptible power supply nits for a range of electronic equipment. 

However, high-tension generators (or transformers) specifically designed for supplying radiological 
apparatus fall in heading 90.22. utomatic voltage regulators are classified in heading 90.32. 

XVI-8504-3 



• 85.04 

(III) INDUCTORS 

These consist essentially of a single coil of wire which, inserted in an AC circuit, limits or 
prevents by its self-induction the flow of the AC. They vary from small chokes used in wireless 
circuits, instruments, etc., to large coils often mounted in concrete, used in power circuits (e.g., 
for limiting the flow of current in the event of a short circuit). 

Inductors or inductances obtained in the form of individual components by a printing process 
remain classifiable in this heading. 
Deflection coils for cathode-ray tubes are classified in heading 85.40. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. In 

• particular, metal tank mercury arc rectifiers, with or without a pump, are always classified as 
parts. 
However, most of the electric components of the devices of this heading are to be found in other headings 
of the Chapter, for example : 

(a) Various switches of heading 85.36 (for example, those used with multiple contact transformers). 

(b) Vacuum or mercury vapour rectifying tubes and valves (other than the metal tank type) and 
thyratrons (heading 85.40). 

(c) Semiconductor diodes, transistors, and thyristors (heading 85.41). 

(d) Articles of heading 85.42. 

XVI-8504-4 



 

 

85.05 • 
85.05 Electro-magnets; per anent magnets and articles intended to become permanent 

magnets after magne 'Nation; electro-magnetic or permanent magnet chucks, clamps 
and similar holding devices; electro-magnetic couplings, clutches and brakes; 
electro-magnetic lifti g heads. 

- Permanent agnets and articles intended to become permanent magnets after 
magnetisat I n: 

8505.11 - - Of metal 

8505.19 - - Other 

8505.20 - Electro-ma: etic couplings, clutches and brakes 

8505.90 - Other, incl ding parts 

This heading covers electro- agnets, those electro-magnet operated appliances specially listed 
in the heading, permanent ma ets and permanent magnet work holders. 

(1) Electro-magnets. 

These are of various siz s and shapes according to the use for which they are intended. • 
They consist essentially f a coil of wire wound around a core of soft iron, this core being 
either in one piece or lam nated. The passing of electric current in the coil confers magnetic 
properties on the core, w ich can then be used either for attraction or repulsion. 

(2) Permanent magnets a d articles intended to become permanent magnets after 
magnetisation. 

Permanent magnets cons st of pieces of hard steel, special alloys or other materials (e.g., 
barium ferrite agglomer ed with plastics or synthetic rubber) which have been rendered 
permanently magnetic. T eir shape varies according to the use for which they are designed. 
To reduce the tendency to de-magnetise, horseshoe-shaped magnets are often furnished 
with a bar of iron (the keeper) adhering to the two poles. Permanent magnets remain 
classified here whatever eir use, including small magnets used, inter alia, as toys. 

Articles intended to bec me permanent magnets after magnetisation are recognisable as 
such by their share and omposition, generally being cubes or discs (tags) of metal or of 
agglomerated femte (e.g.,  barium ferrite). 

(3) Electro-magnetic or pe manent magnet chucks, clamps and similar holding devices. 

These are mainly device of various types in which magnets are used to hold work pieces 
in place while they are b ing worked. This group also covers holding devices for machines 
other than machine-tool (for example, magnetic devices for holding printing plates in 
printing machinery). 

XVI-8505-1 



85.05 

(4) Electro-magnetic clutches and couplings. 

These may be of various types. Certain types consist of a fixed coil around a movable 
armature, the latter being pulled into the coil when current passes and pulled out again by a 
spring when the current is cut off. The heading also covers variable speed couplings, some 
of which are based on the principle of an asynchronous motor. 

(5) Electro-magnetic brakes. 

These generally consist of shoes which, under the influence of electro-magnets, act on the 
rim of a wheel or on the rail. Others are based on the principle of electro-magnetic 
induction, a soft steel disc mounted on the shaft being braked by the action of eddy currents 
induced in it by electro-magnets. The heading does not, however, cover mechanical 
hydraulic or pneumatic brakes controlled by electro-magnetic devices. 

(6) Electro-magnetic lifting heads. 

These consist essentially of electro-magnets, generally circular, and are usually used in 
conjunction with cranes (e.g., for the lifting of scrap iron). Certain types are designed for 
special purposes (e.g., on salvage vessels for the recovery of metal objects from wrecks). 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

* * 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Magnetic ferrite with a binder, in the form of powder or pellets (heading 38.24). 

(b) Electro-magnets, permanent magnets or magnetic devices of this heading, when presented with 
machines, apparatus, toys, games, etc., of which they are designed to form part (classified with those 
machines, apparatus, etc.). 

(c) Media for magnetic recording such as cards composed of unmagnetised magnetic material laminated 
between two plastic sheets and used, in particular, for opening magnetic locks (heading 85.23). 

(d) Electro-magnets designed for use by oculists or surgeons (heading 90.18). 

XVI-8505-2 



85.06 

85.06 - Primary cells and pri ary batteries (+). 

8506.10 - Manganese dioxide 

8506.30 - Mercuric o ide 

8506.40 - Silver oxid 

8506.50 - Lithium 

8506.60 - Air-zinc 

8506.80 - Other prim ry cells and primary batteries 

8506.90 - Parts 

These generate electrical ener by means of chemical reactions. 

A primary cell consists basica ly of a container holding an alkaline or a non-alkaline electrolyte 
(e.g., potassium or sodium h droxide, ammonium chloride or a mixture of lithium chloride, 
ammonium chloride, zinc chlo ide and water) in which two electrodes are immersed. The anode 
is generally of zinc, magnesi	 or of lithium and the cathode (depolarising electrode) is, for 
example, of manganese dioxi • e (mixed with carbon powder), of mercuric oxide or of silver 
oxide. In lithium primary cells, the anode is of lithium and the cathode is, for example, of 
thionyl chloride, of sulphur a ioxide, manganese dioxide or of iron sulphide. A nonaqueous 
electrolyte is used because of the solubility and reactivity of lithium in aqueous solutions. In 
air-zincprimary cells, an alk. I ine or neutral electrolyte is generally used. The zinc is used as 
the anode, oxygen diffuses in o the cell and is used as the cathode. Each electrode is provided 
with a terminal or other arr ngement for connection to an external circuit. The principal 
characteristic of a primary cell is that it is not readily or efficiently recharged. 

Primary cells are used for su plying current for a number of purposes (for bells, telephones, 
hearing aids, cameras, watch s, calculators, heart pacemakers, radios, toys, portable lamps, 
electric prods for cattle, etc.). Cells may be grouped together in batteries, either in series or in 
parallel or a combination of loth. Cells and batteries remain classified here irrespective of the 
use for which they are intend -d (e.g., standard cells for laboratory work producing a constant 
known voltage fall in the head ng). 

The various types of cells incl de : 

(1) Wet cells, in which the e ectrolyte is a liquid, and is not restrained from flowing. Wet cells 
are therefore sensitive to rientation. 

(2) Dry cells, in which the electrolyte is immobilised in absorbent materials or gels (e.g., 
mixed with a thickener •uch as agar-agar or flour to form a paste). The electrolyte used 
may be liquid but it is estrained from flowing. Dry cells are used mainly for portable 
devices. 

(3) Inert cells, or reserve ce is or batteries to which water or all or part of the electrolyte must 
be added before they ca be used, or in which the electrolyte must be heated to become 
ionically conductive. 

(4) Concentration cells, the electrolyte being at a different degree of concentration at each 
electrode. 

XVI-8506-1 



85.06 

Primary cells and batteries may be manufactured to various shapes and sizes. Common types 
are those having a cylindrical or button shape. 

Certain cells	wet cells and some inert cells) are usually presented without their electrolyte, 
but remain classified here. 
This heading does not cover rechargeable cells and batteries, as these are classified in heading 85.07 as 
electric accumulators. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), the heading covers parts of primary cells or batteries, 
including containers. 

* * 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Terminals (heading 85.36). 

(b) Solar cells (heading 85.41). 

(c) Carbon electrodes (heading 85.45). 

(d) Spent primary cells and spent primary batteries and waste and scrap thereof (heading 85.48). 

(e) Thermocouples (e.g., headings 85.03, 85.48, 90.33). 
0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Notes. 

Subheadings 8506.10, 8506.30 and 8506.40 

Classification in these subheadings is determined by the composition of the cathode (depolarising 
electrode). However, primary cells with cathode of manganese dioxide and anode of lithium are 
classified in subheading 8506.50 as lithium primary cells (see the Explanatory Note to that subheading 
below). 

Subheading 8506.50 

Classification in this subheading is determined by the composition of the anode. 

XVI-8506-2 



85.07 

85.07 Electric accumulator., including separators therefor, whether or not rectangular 
(including square). 

8507.10 - Lead-acid,  iif  a kind used for starting piston engines 

8507.20 - Other lead-: cid accumulators 

8507.30 - Nickel-cad um 

8507.40 - Nickel-iro 

8507.50 - Nickel-met :1 hydride 

8507.60 - Lithium-io 

8507.80 - Other accu ulators 

8507.90 - Parts 

Electric accumulators (storage batteries or secondary batteries) are characterised by the fact that 
the electrochemical action is ru  versible so that the accumulator may be recharged. They are used 
to store electricity and sup ly it when required. A direct current is passed through the 
accumulator producing cert in chemical changes (charging); when the terminals of the 
accumulator are subsequently connected to an external circuit these chemical changes reverse 
and produce a direct current in the external circuit (discharging). This cycle of operations, 
charging and discharging, can e repeated for the life of the accumulator. 

Accumulators consist essenti , lly of a container holding the electrolyte in which are immersed 
two electrodes fitted with to coals for connection to an external circuit. In many cases the 
container may be subdivided, each subdivision (cell) being an accumulator in itself; these cells 
are usually connected togeth r in series to produce a higher voltage. A number of cells so 
connected is called a battery A number of accumulators may also be assembled in a larger 
container. Accumulators may .e of the wet or dry cell type. 

The main types of accumulat el s are : 

(1) Lead-acid accumulator , in which the electrolyte is sulphuric acid and the electrodes lead 
plates or lead grids supp rting active material. 

(2) Alkaline accumulator • , in which the electrolyte is usually potassium, or lithium 
hydroxide or thionyl chl ride and the electrodes are, for example : 

(i) Positive electrodes e f nickel or nickel compounds and negative electrodes of iron, 
cadmium or metal h dride; 

(ii) Positive electrodes of lithiated cobalt oxide and negative electrodes of a blend of 
graphite; 

(iii) Positive electrodes f carbon and negative electrodes of metallic lithium or lithium 
alloy; 

(iv) Positive electrodes f silver oxide and negative electrodes of zinc. 

The electrodes may consist f simple plates, grids, rods, etc., or of grids or tubes covered or 
filled with a special paste of he active material. The containers for lead-acid accumulators are 
usually made of glass or, in he case of car batteries, are moulded from plastic, hard rubber or 
composition material. In big stationary accumulators, glass or lead lined,plastic or wood boxes 
are used, while containers f r alkaline accumulators are usually of steel or plastics. Alkaline 
accumulators may be of a sp cific size and shape, so designed to fit the device for which they 
are the source of electricit . They may be within waterproof containers. Many alkaline 
accumulators may have the e ternal appearance of primary cells or batteries of heading 85.06. 

XVI-8507-1 



• 85.07 

Accumulators are used for supplying current for a number of purposes, e.g., motor vehicles, golf 
carts, fork-lift trucks, power hand-tools, cellular telephones, portable automatic data processing 
machines, portable lamps. 

Some lead-acid accumulators are fitted with a hydrometer, which measures the specific gravity 
of the electrolyte and so indicates roughly the degree of charge of the accumulator. 

Electric accumulators remain classified here even if presented without their electrolyte. 

Accumulators containing one or more cells and the circuitry to interconnect the cells amongst 
themselves, often referred to as "battery packs", are covered by this heading, whether or not 
they include any ancillary components which contribute to the accumulator's function of storing 
and supplying energy, or protect it from damage, such as electrical connectors, temperature 
control devices (e.g., thermistors), circuit protection devices, and protective housings. They are 
classified in this heading even if they are designed for use with a specific device. 

• PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), the heading also covers parts of accumulators, e.g., 
containers and covers; lead plates and grids, whether or not coated with paste; separators of any 
material (except of unhardened vulcanised rubber or of textile material), including those in the 
form of flat plates merely cut into rectangles (including squares), meeting very precise technical 
specifications (porosity, dimensions, etc.) and hence ready for use. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Terminals (heading 85.36). 

(b) Spent electric accumulators and waste and scrap thereof (heading 85.48). 

XVI-8507-2 



  

85.08 • 
85.08 - Vacuum cleaners. 

- With self-c ntained electric motor : 

8508.11 - - Of a po er not exceeding 1,500 W and having a dust bag or other 
receptacl capacity not exceeding 20 1 

8508.19 - - Other 

8508.60 - Other vacu m cleaners 

8508.70 - Parts 

Subject to Note 1 (d) to Chap er 85, this heading covers vacuum cleaners of all kinds, whether 
or not hand-held, including ry and wet vacuum cleaners, whether or not presented with 
accessories such as rotary brus es, carpet beating devices, multiple-function suction heads, etc. 

Vacuum cleaners perform o functions : the suction of material, including dust, and the 
filtering of the air stream. Su • tion is effected by means of a turbine fixed directly onto the shaft 
of the motor, turning at high v locity. The dust and other material are collected in an internal or 
external dust bag or other rec ptacle, whereas the air sucked in and filtered is also used to cool 
the motor. • 
The heading includes, inter al , vacuum cleaner type grooming apparatus for horses or cattle. 

Excluded from this heading ar appliances for cleaning carpets in situ by injecting a liquid cleaning 
solution into the carpet, the solu on then being extracted by suction, which are not combination dry and 
wet vacuum cleaners (heading 8 .51 or 85.09). 

This heading also excludes vac urn apparatus of a kind used in medical, surgical, dental or veterinary 
sciences (heading 90.18). 

EQUIPMEN I PRESENTED WITH THE APPLIANCES 
OF THIS HEADING 

Vacuum cleaners of this hea ing may be presented with auxiliary devices (accessories) (for 
brushing, polishing, insectici e spraying, etc.) or interchangeable parts (carpet devices, rotary 
brushes, multiple-function su tion heads, etc.). Such an appliance is classified here together 
with the parts and accessori s presented with it, provided they are of a kind and number 
commonly used with the appl ance. When presented separately, they are classified by reference 
to their nature. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Notes to Section ► VI), parts of appliances of this heading are also classified here. 

XVI-8508-1 



• 85.09 

85.09 - Electro-mechanical domestic appliances, with self-contained electric motor, other 
than vacuum cleaners of heading 85.08. 

8509.40 - Food grinders and mixers; fruit or vegetable juice extractors 

8509.80 - Other appliances 

8509.90 - Parts 

This heading covers a number of domestic appliances in which an electric motor is 
incorporated. The term "domestic appliances" in this heading means appliances normally used 
in the household. These appliances are identifiable, according to type, by one or more 
characteristic features such as overall dimensions, design, capacity, volume. The yardstick for 
judging these characteristics is that the appliances in question must not operate at a level in 
excess of household requirements. 
Subject to the exclusions and in appropriate cases the limitations of weight given in Chapter Note 4, the 
heading covers apparatus which fulfil the above criteria. The heading does not cover appliances driven 

• by a separate electric motor (whether by means of a flexible shaft, transmission belts or other 
transmission equipment), nor appliances which, though similar in construction and use, are clearly 
intended solely for industrial use (e.g., in the food industries, in chimney sweeping, machine cleaning or 
road cleaning); these are classified, in general, in heading 82.10 or in Chapter 84. 

The appliances of this heading are of two groups (see Chapter Note 4) : 

(A) A limited class of articles are classified here irrespective of their weight. 

This group consists of the following only : 

(1) Floor polishers (whether or not with a waxing attachment, and whether or not with a 
heating element for liquefying the wax). 

(2) Food grinders and mixers, e.g., grinders for meat, fish, vegetables or fruit; 
multi-purpose grinders (for coffee, rice, barley, split peas, etc.); milk shakers; ice 
cream mixers; sorbet mixers; dough kneaders; mayonnaise beaters; other similar 
grinders and mixers (including those which, by means of interchangeable parts, can 
also be used for cutting or other manipulations). 

(3) Fruit or vegetable juice extractors. 

(B) A non-limited class of articles are classified in this heading provided their weight is 
20 kg or less. 

This group includes, inter alia : 

(1) Floor scrubbing, scraping or scouring appliances, and appliances for sucking up 
dirty water or soap suds after scrubbing. 

(2) Appliances for spraying polish on to floors before polishing. These are usually fitted 
with heating elements to liquefy the wax. 

(3) Kitchen waste disposers. These devices are designed to be attached to the kitchen sink 
and are used to grind kitchen waste. 

(4) Peelers, chippers, cutters, etc., for potatoes or other vegetables. 

XVI-8509-1 



85.09 • 
(5) Slicers of all kinds (e g., for meat, sausages, bacon, cheese, bread, fruit or vegetables). 

(6) Knife sharpeners an cleaners. 

(7) Electric tooth brushe 

(8) Air humidifiers and ehumidifiers. 

EQUIPMENT PRESEN ED WITH THE APPLIANCES OF THIS HEADING 

Many of the appliances listed bove may be presented with interchangeable parts or auxiliary 
devices to make them suitabl for various purposes. For example, food mixers which can be 
used for cutting, grinding, whi ping, mincing, etc.; slicers with honing and sharpening devices; 
floor scrubbers with a polishi brush set; scrubbers with a soap feeder and suction device for 
removing dirty water or soap uds. Such an appliance is classified here together with the parts 
and accessories presented with it, provided they are of a kind and number commonly used with 
the appliance. The weight of t extra interchangeable parts or detachable auxiliary devices is to 
be ignored in determining w ether the appliance falls in the heading under the terms of 
paragraph (B) above. 

The appliances of this headi g may be mounted on runners, castors or similar devices to • 
facilitate use. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro sions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts of the appliances of this heading are also classified 
here. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Fans or ventilating or rec ling hoods incorporating a fan, whether or not fitted with filters 
(heading 84.14). 

(b) Refrigerators (heading 84.1 

(c) Roller or other ironing machi es (heading 84.20 or 84.51).	 • 

(d) Centrifugal clothes-dryers (h ading 84.21) and household washing machines (heading 84.50). 

(e) Dish washing machines (hea ing 84.22). 

(f) Grass mowers (heading 84.3 ). 

(g) Dairy type butter churns (he ding 84.34). 

• 
XVI-8509-2 



85.09 

(h) Fruit or vegetable juice extractors, food grinders and mixers, or the like, for industrial or commercial 
use, of the type used in restaurants or similar establishments (heading 84.35 or 84.38, respectively). 

(ij) Appliances for cleaning carpets in situ by injecting a liquid cleaning solution into the carpet, the 
solution then being extracted by suction, designed for use in establishments (other than domestic 
premises) such as hotels, motels, hospitals, offices, restaurants and schools (heading 84.51). 

(k) Sewing machines (heading 84.52). 

(1) Hair-removing appliances (heading 85.10). 

(m) Electro-thermic domestic appliances (heading 85.16). 

(n) Massage appliances (heading 90.19). 

XVI-8509-3 



85.10 

85.10 - Shavers, hair clipper and hair-removing appliances, with self-contained electric 
motor. 

8510.10 - Shavers 

8510.20 - Hair clippe 

8510.30 - Hair-remov ng appliances 

8510.90 - Parts 

This heading covers electric s avers and hair clippers which have a built-in electric motor or 
vibrator, whether for use on uman beings, or for shearing sheep or for grooming horses, 
clipping cattle, etc. 

In electric shavers (dry shaver ) rotating or reciprocating cutters or knife blades slide along the 
inside of a perforated or slo ed plate, thus cutting those hairs which protrude through the 
perforations or slots. In the cas of hair clippers, a comb-like cutter blade slides to and fro over a 
fixed metal comb thus cutting he hair or wool which is caught between the teeth of the combs. 
Hair clippers for barbers' use perate on a similar principle to those for sheep shearers, grooms, 
etc., but differ in size. 

This heading also covers el ctro-mechanical hair-removing appliances with self-contained 
electric motor; these applianc s, which grip the hair and pluck it out at the root, may operate 
with either a micro-roller, or metal spiral which rotates around its own axis, or a guard, a 
depilating head and a set of de ilating wheels. 

PARTS 
Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of electric shavers, hair clippers or hair-removing 
appliances are also classified ere. These include, inter alia, cutter heads, cutter blades, knife 
blades and comb blades. 

* * 

Hair clippers operated by a xible shaft driven by a separate electric motor are classified in 
heading 82.14, the electric mot (whether or not equipped with the flexible shaft) being classified in 
heading 85.01. 

XVI-8510-1 



85.11 

85.11 - Electrical ignition or starting equipment of a kind used for spark-ignition or 
compression-ignition internal combustion engines (for example, ignition magnetos, 
magneto-dynamos, ignition coils, sparking plugs and glow plugs, starter motors); 
generators (for example, dynamos, alternators) and cut-outs of a kind used in 
conjunction with such engines. 

8511.10 - Sparking plugs 

8511.20 - Ignition magnetos; magneto-dynamos; magnetic flywheels 

8511.30 - Distributors; ignition coils 

8511.40 - Starter motors and dual purpose starter-generators 

8511.50 - Other generators 

8511.80 - Other equipment 

8511.90 - Parts 

This heading covers electrical starting or ignition equipment and appliances for internal 
combustion engines of any kind (piston or other types), whether for use in motor cars, aircraft, 
boats or the like, or for stationary engines. It also covers generators and cut-outs for use in 
conjunction with such internal combustion engines. 

The heading includes : 

(A) Sparking plugs. 

These consist of a central insulated electrode and a point (or points) attached to the casing. 
The casing is partly threaded at its base for screwing it into the cylinder-head, and there is 
a terminal at the top of the central electrode for connection to the source of current. When a 
high voltage is applied to the central electrode a spark jumps between that electrode and 
the point or points and is used for igniting the explosive mixture in the cylinder. 

(B) Ignition magnetos (including magneto-dynamos). 

These are used to provide the necessary high tension voltage to be applied to the sparking 
plugs of an internal combustion engine; they are used mainly for racing cars, tractors, 
aircraft, motor-boat or motor-cycle engines. They are of the following main types : 

(1) Revolving armature magnetos. These incorporate a form of AC generator in which 
an armature, wound with a primary low tension coil, rotates between the poles of a 
permanent magnet. This primary coil is connected to a contact breaker and capacitor, 
and the sudden making and breaking of the current in this coil induces very high 
voltage in a secondary winding. The whole is usually built in one housing, on the top 
of which a distributor arm is mounted to distribute the voltage to the sparking plugs in 
turn. 

(2) Stationary armature magnetos. These are of two types. In both the armature 
winding, contact breaker and capacitor are stationary; but in one type the magnets 
revolve, whereas in the other type, the magnets are also stationary and soft iron 
inductors revolve between the magneto and the armature winding. 

(3) Magneto-dynamos. These comprise a magneto and a dynamo combined into a single 
unit with a common drive; they are normally used on motor-cycles. 

XVI-8511-1 



85.11 • 
(C) Magnetic flywheels. 

These consist of a magne"Sc device fitted to a flywheel to produce a low tension current for 
ignition purposes. 

(D) Distributors. 

These distribute the ignition current to the sparking plugs in turn, and also incorporate an 
interrupter to make and b eak the circuit in the primary winding of the ignition coil; both 
functions are synchronis with the strokes of the pistons in the cylinders by means of a 
cam driven by the engine. 

(E) Ignition coils. 

These consist of speciall modified induction coils, usually in a cylindrical container. By 
connecting the primary v a an interrupter to the battery, a high voltage is produced in the 
secondary and is led to th sparking plugs via a distributor. 

In some ignition systems double-spark ignition coil is connected directly to two sparking 
plugs and the coil genera es an ignition spark in each plug simultaneously, with the spark 
from one plug producin its cylinder power stroke and the spark from the other plug 
having no effect on its c linder because it is on the exhaust stroke. Such systems do not • 
require a distributor as th ignition coil is connected directly to the sparking plugs. In these 
systems the coils are ener ised by an electronic (semiconductor) coil module. 

(F) Starter motors. 

These are small electric otors, usually of the DC series wound type. They are fitted with 
a small pinion capable f travelling up and down a screwed shaft, or with some other 
mechanical device for c pling them temporarily to the internal combustion engine to be 
started. 

(G) Generators (dynamos a d alternators). 

These are driven by the ngine, and serve to charge the batteries and to supply current to 
the lighting, signalling, eating and other electrical equipment of motor vehicles, aircraft, 
etc. Alternators are used ith a rectifier. 

(H) Booster coils. 

These are small inductio coils used, mainly on aircraft, when the turning speed at starting 
is too low for the engine agnetos to function. 

(LT) Glow plugs. 

These are similar to spar ing plugs, but in place of the electrode and points for producing a 
spark, they have a small esistor which, when current is passed, becomes heated. They are 
used to heat the air in the cylinders of diesel engines before and during starting. 

(K) Heating coils. 

These are intended for m unting in the air intake of diesel engines for starting purposes. 

XVI-8511-2 



• 85.11 

(L) Dynamo cut-out apparatus. 

These prevent the dynamo from being driven as a motor, at the expense of the battery, 
when the engine is stationary or turning at low speed. 

Cut-outs combined, in a single housing, with a voltage regulator or a current regulator are 
also classified here. In addition to protecting the battery and the dynamo, these devices 
ensure a constant flow of charge current or limit the intensity of this current. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

* * 

• The heading excludes : 

(a) Engine starters as used on airfields, bus stations, etc., for starting internal combustion engines and 
consisting essentially of a transformer and rectifier (heading 85.04). 

(b) Electric accumulators (heading 85.07). 

(c) Dynamos for use on bicycles for lighting purposes only (heading 85.12). 

XVI-8511-3 



85.12 • 
85.12 - Electrical lighting o signalling equipment (excluding articles of heading 85.39), 

windscreen wipers, efrosters and demisters, of a kind used for cycles or motor 
vehicles. 

8512.10 - Lighting or visual signalling equipment of a kind used on bicycles 

8512.20 - Other lighti g or visual signalling equipment 

8512.30 - Sound sign lling equipment 

8512.40 - Windscree wipers, defrosters and demisters 

8512.90 - Parts 

This heading covers electrical apparatus and appliances specialised for use on cycles or motor 
vehicles for lighting or sig ailing purposes. It does not, however, cover, dry batteries 
(heading 85.06), electric accu ulators (heading 85.07) or dynamos and magneto-dynamos of 
heading 85.11. The headin also includes electrical windscreen wipers, defrosters and 
demisters for motor vehicles. 

The heading includes, inter all • 
(1) Dynamos for generating lectric current by means of a friction wheel running on one of the 

tyres or wheel rims of a b cycle or, in some rare cases, of a motor-cycle. 

(2) Battery holders, equip ed with a switch, terminals, contacts, etc., for cycle lighting 
equipment; battery-oper ted lamps, designed for mounting on cycles. 

(3) Headlamps of all kind including lamps fitted with dimming or dipping attachments; 
diffused driving lamps; a ti-fog lamps; spot-lights; search-lamps of a kind used on police 
cars or the like (includin those which, attached to a length of cable, can be used as hand 
lamps or can be placed o the road). 

(4)  Side lamps; tail lamps; arking lamps; licence plate lamps. 

(5)  Braking lights, directio indication lights, reversing lamps and the like. 

(6)  Combinations of some o the above-mentioned lamps, assembled in one casing. 

(7)  Interior lighting lamps such as dome lamps, wall lamps, step indicating lamps, door 
frame lamps and rostrum nt panel lamps. 

(8) Luminous overtaking ignals, transmitting to the driver automatically (sometimes by 
means of a photoelectric ell) a signal indicating the presence of an overtaking vehicle. 

(9)  Other electrical visual s gnalling apparatus, e.g., illuminated triangles for vehicles with 
trailers , illuminated indi ators (of the revolving dome type or the "lightbar" type) for taxis, 
police vehicles, fire engi es, etc. 

• 
XVI-8512-1 



• 85.12 

(10) Parking equipment operated by means of external feelers, which, when they touch the 
curb or other object, cause a light or other signal to warn the driver. 

(11) Anti-theft alarms which emit visual or audio signals to warn of attempts to break in to a 
vehicle. 

(12) Horns, sirens and other electrical sound signalling appliances. 

(13) Electrical apparatus which emit audio signals to warn the driver of the proximity of 
vehicles or other objects behind the vehicle when reversing. These apparatus usually 
comprise ultrasonic sensors, an electronic control unit, a buzzer or beeper and associated 
wiring. 

(14) Electrical apparatus of a kind used in a motor vehicle to warn the driver, by visual or 
audio signals, that a speed detection device, such as a radar gun or a laser gun, is operating 
in the vicinity. 

(15) Windscreen wipers, including dual windscreen wipers, driven by an electric motor. 

• (16) Defrosters and demisters. These consist of a resistance wire mounted in a frame for 
fitting to the windscreen. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

* * 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Glass lenses (heading 70.14). 

(b) Air conditioning machinery or apparatus (heading 84.15). 

(c) Electric sound amplifier sets, consisting of a microphone, audio-frequency amplifier and 
loudspeaker, used for transmitting to the driver of a towing vehicle the warning hoot or other road 
sounds behind his trailer (heading 85.18). 

(d) Boards, panels and other bases, equipped with two or more apparatus of heading 85.36 (e.g., an 
assembly of switches for mounting on the steering column) (heading 85.37). 

(e) Electric lamps, including sealed beam lamp units, of heading 85.39. 

(0 Insulated electric wire and cable, whether or not cut to length or fitted with connectors or made up in 
sets (e.g., ignition wiring sets) (heading 85.44). 

(g) Non-electric car heating apparatus which also acts as defroster or demister (heading 73.22 or 87.08). 

XVI-8512-2 



 

85.13 • 
85.13 - Portable electric lam s designed to function by their own source of energy (for 

example, dry batteri e accumulators, magnetos), other than lighting equipment of 
heading 85.12. 

8513.10 - Lamps 

8513.90 - Parts  

This heading covers portable lectric lamps designed to function by means of a self-contained 
source of electricity (e.g., dry ell, accumulator or magneto). 

They comprise two elements (i.e., the lamp proper and the source of electricity) which are 
usually mounted and directly c nnected together, often in a single case. In some types, however, 
these elements are separate an are connected by wires. 

The term "portable lamps" re ers only to those lamps (i.e., both the lamp and its electricity 
supply) which are designed fo use when carried in the hand or on the person, or are designed to 
be attached to a portable articl or object. They usually have a handle or a fastening device and 
may be recognised by their pa icular shapes and their light weight. The term therefore excludes 
lighting equipment for mot • vehicles or cycles (heading 85.12), and lamps which are 
connected to a fixed installatio (heading 94.05). • 
The lamps of this heading incl de : 

Pocket lamps. Some ("d amo lamps") are operated by a magneto, hand driven by means 
of a spring-loaded lever. 

Other hand lamps (incl ding those with an adjustable beam). Hand lamps are often fitted 
with a simple device fo hanging them temporarily on a wall, etc., while others are 
designed so that they can e placed on the ground. 

Lamps, torches or flashl ghts in the shape of pens, often fitted with a clip for securing the 
lamp to the user's pocket hen not in use. 

Morse signalling lamps. 

Miners' safety lamps; t e lighting device is usually designed for fitting to the miners' 
helmet, while the source f electricity (accumulator) is usually hooked on to the belt. 

Examination lamps for general use, fixed to a headband (which usually consists of a 
curved strip of metal). Su h lamps are classified here only if they have their own source of 
current (dry battery in us r's pocket, for example). The lamps of this heading are used by 
doctors, watchmakers, je ellers, etc. Specialised medical inspection lamps (e.g., for throat 
or ear inspection) are exc uded (heading 90.18). 

Fancy torches in the sh pe of pistols, lipsticks, etc. Composite articles composed of a 
lamp or torch and a pe , screwdriver, key ring, etc., remain classified here only if the 
principal function of the hole is the provision of light. 

Reading lamps fitted wit a clip or the like for attachment to a book or magazine. 

XVI-8513-1 



• 85.13 

PARTS 
Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the lamps of this heading are also classified here. 

* 
* * 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Photographic flash-light apparatus (heading 90.06). 

(b) Laser pointers incorporating a laser diode (heading 90.13). 

XVI-8513-2 



  

 

85.14 • 
85.14 - Industrial or laborat ry electric furnaces and ovens (including those functioning by 

induction or dielectri loss); other industrial or laboratory equipment for the heat 
treatment of material by induction or dielectric loss. 

8514.10 - Resistance eated furnaces and ovens 

8514.20 - Furnaces a d ovens functioning by induction or dielectric loss 

8514.30 - Other fern es and ovens 

8514.40 - Other equi ment for the heat treatment of materials by induction or dielectric 
loss 

8514.90 - Parts 

This heading covers a num er of industrial or laboratory type electro-thermic machines, 
apparatus and appliances in w ich the heat is obtained electrically (e.g., by the heating effect of 
a current in a conductor; fr i m an electric arc). The heading includes furnaces and ovens 
functioning by induction or d.  lectric loss and other industrial or laboratory equipment for the 
heat treatment of materials by induction or dielectric loss (e.g., industrial microwave furnaces, 
ovens and equipment). The eading excludes electro-thermic appliances of a kind used for 
domestic purposes (heading 8 .16). • 

(I) INDUSTRIA OR LABORATORY ELECTRIC FURNACES 
AND OVE S (INCLUDING THOSE FUNCTIONING 

BY IN UCTION OR DIELECTRIC LOSS) 

Electric furnaces and ovens c nsist essentially of a more or less closed space or vessel in which 
a relatively high temperature i obtained. They are used for many purposes (melting, annealing, 
tempering, enamelling, weldi g, heat treatment of welds, etc.). The principal types include 
retort furnaces, bell-type fu aces, trough furnaces, crucible furnaces, tunnel furnaces, etc. 
Some of these furnaces may have special tilting attachments, or be provided with an inner 
vessel for the treatment of me is in a particular gas to prevent oxidation. 

The furnaces and ovens cover d by this group include, inter alia : 

(A) Resistance heated furn ces and ovens in which the heat is produced by the passage of a 
current through heating esistors. These heating elements (resistors) transfer heat to the 
stock or charge by radiati In  and convection. 

(B) Resistance furnaces for I eating bars of metal or granular materials where the material 
to be heated serves as th resistor. These consist of a container in which current is passed 
through the material itse the electrical resistance of the material produces the necessary 
heat. 

(C) Liquid resistance furna es consisting of baths furnished with electrodes. In operation the 
bath contains molten etal, molten salts or special oil, maintained at the required 
temperature by the passa e of electricity, via the electrodes, through the liquid; the object is 
heated by being plunged n the bath of liquid. 

(D) Electrolytic furnaces fo smelting or refining metals. These are also liquid resistance 
furnaces fitted with elec odes immersed in a molten bath electrolyte. The bath contains 
the metal bearing consti ent of the ore dissolved in a molten salt. Electrolytic dissociation 
which is caused by the assage of electricity through the electrolyte via the electrodes 
results in pure molten me al collecting at the cathode while a gas is given off at the anode. 

XVI-8514-1 



• 85.14 

(E) Low frequency induction furnaces. Low frequency AC in a primary coil is linked 
magnetically by a soft iron core with the charge to be heated, and induces current in that 
charge thus causing it to be heated. In certain furnaces of this type, the molten charge 
circulates from the main crucible through vertical looped piping in which the heating 
currents are induced from the primary circuit. 

(F) High frequency induction furnaces. An AC of high frequency (often of radio frequency) 
in the primary coil induces eddy currents in the charge to be heated. This type of furnace 
has no iron core. 

(G) Dielectric capacitance furnaces and ovens. The charge, which must be electrically 
non-conducting, is placed between two metal plates connected to a source of AC. In effect 
the arrangement operates as a capacitor, and dielectric loss in the charge causes heat to be 
developed within it. This group includes industrial microwave ovens, in which dielectric 
products to be heated are subjected to the action of electromagnetic waves. By dielectric 
loss, the energy from the waves is converted simultaneously into heat throughout the mass 
of the product, ensuring very uniform heating. These ovens are used for drying, defrosting, 
moulding of plastics, firing ceramics, etc. 

(H) Arc furnaces in which the heat is generated by an electric arc, struck between electrodes or 
between an electrode and the charge to be heated. These furnaces are used for the 
production of pig iron, various ferro-alloys, calcium carbide, for reducing iron ore, for the 
fixation of nitrogen from the air, etc. Certain low temperature arc furnaces are also used for 
distilling materials of relatively low boiling point (e.g., zinc or phosphorus); if, however, 
they are equipped with condensers to collect the distillate, the whole is excluded 
(heading 84.19). 

(LT) Infra-red radiation ovens heated by a number of infra-red lamps or radiation plates. 

Certain furnaces or ovens use more than one method of heating (e.g., high and low frequency 
induction or resistance for melting and heating metals, etc.; infra-red and high frequency biscuit 
baking ovens; infra-red, resistance and dielectric capacitance (microwave) ovens for heating 
objects). 

The furnaces and ovens described in this heading include, inter alia : 

(1) Ovens for bread, pastry or biscuit making. 

(2) Dental ovens. 

(3) Crematorium furnaces. 

(4) Furnaces for incinerating waste. 

(5) Furnaces or ovens for annealing or tempering glass. 
This heading excludes electrically heated apparatus for drying, sterilising or similar operations 
(heading 84.19). 

XVI-8514 -2 



85.14 • 
(II) OTHER INDUSTRIA OR LABORATORY EQUIPMENT FOR THE HEAT 

TREATMENT OF MAI ERIALS BY INDUCTION OR DIELECTRIC LOSS 

The heading also includes el ctric induction or dielectric heating equipment (for example, 
microwave equipment), even f not in the form of a furnace or oven. This equipment (used 
mainly for the heat treatment 4 f small articles) consists essentially of electrical equipment for 
producing high-frequency osc llations, mounted together with the appropriate plates or coils, 
often of special design for the articular articles to be treated. 

These include, inter alia : 

(1) Machines with induction oils for heating by induction objects made up of materials which 
are good conductors of lectricity, by means of low, medium or high-frequency power 
(e.g., machines used for s perficial hardening of crankshafts, cylinders, cog wheels or other 
metal parts; machines fsr melting, sintering, annealing, tempering or preheating metal 
parts). 

(2) Machines with electrode serving as a capacitor (e.g., in the form of plates, bars) for 
dielectric (capacitive) he ing of objects made up of materials which are non-conductors or 
bad conductors of elect city, by means of high frequency power (e.g., wood-drying 
machines; machines for •reheating thermohardenable moulding materials in the form of • 
pellets or powder, etc.). 

Some special types of equipmr nt are designed for the progressive heat-treatment of a bar passed 
through the coil, or for the rep titive treatment of a series of articles. 

Rotary converters and high-frequency generators when presented together with heat-treatment 
equipment are also classified in this heading. When presented separately, they fall in 
heading 85.02 or 85.43, as the case may be. 

However, machines for inducti  ii n treatment used for soldering or brazing metals and machines for 
heat-treatment by dielectric los used for welding plastics or other materials (e.g., high-frequency 
pressing machines for welding a d high-frequency line welding machines) fall in heading 85.15. Presses 
incorporating heating devices are also excluded (Chapter 84). 

* 

This heading also covers furn ces and other appliances specially designed for the separation, by 
pyrometallurgical processes, of irradiated nuclear fuels, appliances for the treatment of 
radioactive waste (e.g., for the firing of clays or glass containing radioactive residues or for the 
combustion of graphite or r. II ioactive filters) or those for the sintering or heat-treatment of 
fissile material recovered far recycling. However, appliances for isotopic separation are 
classified in heading 84.01. 

XVI-8514-3 



• 85.14 

PARTS 
Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here 
(e.g., armatures, doors, inspection holes, panels and domes, electrode holders and metal 
electrodes). 

* 
* * 

However, the heading also excludes : 

(a) Bricks, blocks and similar refractory or ceramic goods for the construction or lining of electric 
furnaces (Chapter 69). 

(b) Electric furnaces and ovens for manufacturing semiconductor wafers or flat panel displays 
(heading 84.86). 

(c) Electric heating resistors (heading 85.16 or 85.45, as the case may be). 

(d) Electrodes of graphite or other carbon, with or without metal (heading 85.45). 

XVI-8514-4 



85.15 • 
85.15 - Electric (including el ctrically heated gas), laser or other light or photon beam, 

ultrasonic, electron eam, magnetic pulse or plasma arc soldering, brazing or 
welding machines a d apparatus, whether or not capable of cutting; electric 
machines and appara s for hot spraying of metals or cermets. 

- Brazing or oldering machines and apparatus : 

8515.11 - - Soldering irons and guns 

8515.19 - - Other 

- Machines a d apparatus for resistance welding of metal : 

8515.21 - - Fully or p rtly automatic 

8515.29 - - Other 

- Machines d apparatus for arc (including plasma arc) welding of metals : 

8515.31 - - Fully or partly automatic 

8515.39 - - Other 

8515.80 - Other mac ines and apparatus 

8515.90 - Parts 

(I) SOLDERING, BRA RING OR WELDING MACHINES AND APPARATUS 

This group covers certain s s ldering, brazing or welding machines and apparatus, whether 
portable or fixed. They are al 'o classified here when they are capable of cutting. 

Welding operations may be pe formed manually or be fully or partly automatic. 

These include : 

(A) Brazing or soldering m chines and apparatus. 

The heat is normally gen rated by induction or conduction using electrical power sources. 

Brazing and soldering a operations in which metal parts are joined by means of a filler 
metal with a lower me ting point that wets the parent metal(s). The parent metal(s) 
does(do) not participate by fusion in making the joint. The filler metal is usually 
distributed between the surfaces of the joint by capillary attraction. Brazing can be 
distinguished from sold:ring by the melting point temperature of filler metals used. In 
brazing it is generally ab•ve 450 °C, whereas in soldering the melting point is achieved at 
a lower temperature. 

Only machines and appa atus which, by reason of their special equipment (for example, a 
system for feeding in s lder wire), are identifiable as solely or principally intended for 
brazing or soldering b long to this group. Other appliances are to be considered as 
furnaces, ovens or heatin equipment within the meaning of heading 85.14. 

XVI-8515-1 



• 85.15 

This heading also covers electrically heated hand soldering irons and guns. 

(B) Machines and apparatus for resistance welding of metal. 

The heat required for forming welded joints is produced by the resistance to the flow of an 
electric current through the parts to be joined (Joule heat). During welding the parts are 
held together under pressure and fluxes or filler metals are not used. 

These machines are of many kinds varying according to the type of article to be welded. 
They include, for example, butt welding or flash butt welding machines; single-spot 
welding machines comprising guns with or without built-in power sources; multispot 
machines and associated equipment; projection welding machines; seam welding 
machines; high-frequency resistance welding apparatus. 

(C) Machines and apparatus for arc or plasma arc welding of metals, whether or not 
capable of cutting. 

(1) Arc welding. 

The source of heat is an electric arc struck either between two electrodes or between 
one such electrode and the work piece. 

There are many machines of this kind, e.g., for manual metal arc welding with coated 
electrodes; for gas-shielded arc welding; for welding or cutting with consumable or 
non-consumable electrodes or with covered arc (inert-gas metal arc welding (MIG-
Metal Inert Gas); active-gas metal arc welding (MAG- Metal Active Gas); inert-gas 
tungsten arc welding (TIG-Tungsten Inert Gas); submerged arc welding (SA), 
electro-slag or electro-gas welding, etc.). 

(2) Plasma arc welding. 

The source of heat is a constricted arc which, by ionisation and dissociation, converts 
auxiliarygas into a plasma (plasma jet). The gas may be inert (argon, helium), 
polyatomic (nitrogen, hydrogen) or a mixture of the two. 

(D) Machines and apparatus for induction welding of metals. 

The heat is produced by passing a current through one or more inductor coils. 

(E) Machines and apparatus for electron beam welding, whether or not capable of 
cutting. 

The heat is produced in the piece(s) to be welded or cut by impact of the electrons of a 
focussed electron beam generated in vacuum. 

(F) Machines and apparatus for vacuum diffusion welding. 

The heat is generally produced by induction but may be produced by electron beam or 
resistance. 

The apparatus consists essentially of a vacuum chamber, vacuum pump, means of exerting 
pressure and heating equipment. 

XVI-8515-2 



85.15 • 
(G) Machines and apparatu for photon beam welding, whether or not capable of cutting. 

Photon beam welding ma, be divided into : 

(1) Laser beam welding 

The heat is derived om a source of essentially coherent, monochromatic radiation, 
which can be focusses into a high-intensity beam. It is produced by the impact of this 
beam on the piece to e welded. 

(2) Light beam welding 

The heat is produced y impact of a non-coherent focussed light beam. 

(H) Machines and apparatu for welding thermoplastic materials. 

(1) Welding with electr' ally heated gas (hot gas welding). 

The surfaces to be j i ined are warmed by electrically heated gas (generally air) and 
joined under pressure with or without additives. 

(2) Welding with electr cally heated elements (heating element welding). • 
The surfaces to be j i ined are warmed by means of electrically heated elements and 
joined under pressur with or without additives. 

(3) High-frequency wel ing. 

Surfaces of thermop astic materials (e.g. acrylic polymers, polyethylene, poly(vinyl-
chloride), polyamide (e.g. nylon)) with reasonably high dielectric losses are heated in a 
high-frequency alte ating field and then joined under pressure. Additives may be 
used. 

(Ii) Machines and apparat s for ultrasonic welding. 

The parts to be joined ar held together and subjected to ultrasonic vibrations. This process 
makes it possible to jo n metals or alloys which do not respond to ordinary welding 
techniques, and to weld metallic foils, parts of two or more different metals, or plastic 
films. 

* * 

Electric soldering, welding or brazing machines are usually fed with low-voltage DC from a DC 
generator, or with low-volta e AC from a step-down transformer. The transformer, etc., is 
usually incorporated in the achine, but in some cases (e.g., in certain mobile machines), the 
welding head or welding app iance is connected to the transformer, etc., by electric cable. Even 
in the latter case the headin covers the whole apparatus provided the transformer, etc., is 
presented with its associate welding head or welding appliance; presented separately, the 
transformer or generator is cl. sified in its own appropriate heading (heading 85.02 or 85.04). 

This heading also covers ind trial robots specially designed for welding purposes. 

XVI-8515-3 



• 85.15 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Packaging machines fitted with electric welding appliances (heading 84.22). 

(b) Fusing presses (heading 84.51). 

(c) Machines designed exclusively for cutting (generally heading 84.56). 

(d) Friction welding machines (heading 84.68). 

(e) Soldering, brazing or welding machines and apparatus of a kind solely or principally used for the 
assembly of semiconductors (heading 84.86). 

(II) ELECTRIC MACHINES AND APPARATUS FOR HOT SPRAYING 
OF METALS OR CERMETS 

These are electric arc apparatus which melt down metals or cermets and at the same time spray 
them by means of compressed air. 

• The heading does not cover separately presented metal spraying pistols of heading 84.24. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

These include, inter alia, soldering heads and tongs, electrode holders and metal contact 
electrodes (for example, contact points, rollers and jaws) as well as torch points and sets of 
nozzles for atomic hydrogen hand welding equipment. 

The following, however, are excluded from this heading : 

(a) Consumable electrodes made of base metal or metal carbides (classified according to constituent 
material or in heading 83.11, as the case may be). 

(b) Electrodes of graphite or other carbon, with or without metal (heading 85.45). 

XVI-8515-4 



85.16 • 
85.16 - Electric instantaneo s or storage water heaters and immersion heaters; electric 

space heating appar tus and soil heating apparatus; electro-thermic hair-dressing 
apparatus (for exam le, hair dryers, hair curlers, curling tong heaters) and hand 
dryers; electric sm othing irons; other electro-thermic appliances of a kind 
used for domestic purposes; electric heating resistors, other than those of 
heading 85.45. 

8516.10 - Electric in•tantaneous or storage water heaters and immersion heaters 

- Electric sp ce heating apparatus and electric soil heating apparatus : 

8516.21 - - Storage ating radiators 

8516.29 - - Other 

- Electro-thermic hair-dressing or hand-drying apparatus : 

8516.31 - - Hair dryers 

8516.32 - - Other ha' -dressing apparatus 

8516.33 - - Hand-d mg apparatus • 
8516.40 - Electric s oothing irons 

8516.50 - Microwav ovens 

8516.60 - Other ove s; cookers, cooking plates, boiling rings, grillers and roasters 

- Other elec u o-thermic appliances : 

8516.71 - - Coffee o tea makers 

8516.72 - - Toasters 

8516.79 - - Other 

8516.80 - Electric h=ating resistors 

8516.90 - Parts 

(A) ELECTRIC INS ANTANEOUS OR STORAGE WATER HEATERS 
AND IMMERSION HEATERS 

This group includes : 

(1) Geysers in which the w ter is heated as it flows through. 

(2) Storage water heaters whether or not of the pressure type), i.e., heat-insulated tanks with 
immersion heating elem nts. In these heaters water is heated gradually. 

(3)  Dual-system heaters in which the water is heated either electrically or by connection to a 
fuel-heated hot water sy tern; they are often equipped with a thermostatic control to operate 
them electrically only w en the alternative means is insufficient. 

XVI-8516-1 



• 85.16 

(4) Electrode hot water boilers, in which an AC passes through the water between two 
electrodes. 

(5) Immersion heaters of different shapes and forms depending on their use, are generally 
used in tanks, vats, etc., for heating liquids, semi-fluid (other than solid) substances or 
gases. They are also designed to be used in pots, pans, tumblers, cups, baths, beakers, etc., 
usually with a heat-insulated handle and a hook for hanging the heater in the vessel. 

They have a reinforced protective sheath which is highly resistant to mechanical stress and 
to seepage from liquids, semi-fluid (other than solid) substances and gases. A powder 
(usually magnesium oxide) with good dielectric and thermal properties holds the wire 
resistor (resistance) in place within the sheath and insulates it electrically. 

Assemblies consisting of immersion heaters permanently incorporated in a tank, vat or 
other vessel are classified in heading 84.19 unless they are designed for water heating only 
or for domestic use, in which case they remain in this heading. Solar water heaters are also 
classified in heading 84.19. 

(6) Electric equipment for producing boiling water. 
Electric central heating boilers are classified in heading 84.03. 

(B) ELECTRIC SPACE HEATING APPARATUS AND 
SOIL HEATING APPARATUS 

This group includes : 

(1) Electric storage heating apparatus, in which electric elements heat up a solid (e.g., 
bricks) or a liquid which stores the heat produced and subsequently releases it, when 
required, to the surrounding atmosphere. 

(2) Electric fires (fan heaters and radiant heaters), including portable types with parabolic 
reflectors and sometimes with built-in fans. Many of these fires are fitted with coloured 
lamps and flicker devices to imitate a coal or wood fire. 

(3) Electric radiators. These are apparatus in which electric elements heat up a liquid (for 
example, oil) which circulates in the radiator and which then radiates the heat to the 
surrounding atmosphere. 

(4) Convection heaters. These circulate air by convection currents, sometimes assisted by a 
fan. 

(5) Heating panels for mounting in the ceiling or to a wall including panels producing 
infra-red radiation for heating public places, streets, etc. 

(6) Heating units for motor cars, railway coaches, aircraft, etc., other than defrosters and 
demisters. 

XVI-8516-2 



85.16 • 
(7) Road heating equipme to prevent the formation of frost and soil heating equipment, 

especially used to encour: ge plant growth, the elements of which are usually buried in the 
ground. 

(8) Engine heaters for placi g beneath a car to facilitate starting. 
Electric central heating boilers ar classified in heading 84.03. 

(C) ELECTRO THERMIC HAIR-DRESSING APPARATUS 
AND HAND DRYERS 

These include : 

(1) Hair dryers, including d ing hoods and those with a pistol grip and built-in fan. 

(2) Hair curlers and electri at permanent waving apparatus. 

(3) Curling tong heaters. 

(4) Hand dryers. • 
(D) LECTRIC SMOOTHING IRONS 

This group covers smoothin irons of all kinds, whether for domestic use or for tailors, 
dressmakers, etc., including c rdless irons. These cordless irons consist of an iron incorporating 
a heating element and a stand hich can be connected to the mains. The iron makes contact with 
the current only when placed in this stand. This group also includes electric steam smoothing 
irons whether they incorpora e a water container or are designed to be connected to a steam 
pipe. 

(E) OTHER ELEC RO-THERMIC APPLIANCES OF A KIND USED 
OR DOMESTIC PURPOSES 

This group includes all elec o-thermic machines and appliances provided they are normally 
used in the household. Ce ain of these have been referred to in previous parts of this 
Explanatory Note (e.g., ele tric fires, geysers, hair dryers, smoothing irons, etc.). Others 
include : 

Microwave ovens. 

Other ovens and cook rs, cooking plates, boiling rings, grillers and roasters (e.g., 
convection type, resist nce type, infra-red, high frequency induction and combined 
gas-electric appliances). 

Coffee or tea makers (in luding percolators). 

Toasters, including toast r-ovens which are designed essentially for toasting bread but can 
also bake small items sup h as potatoes. 

Kettles, saucepans, stea ers; jacketed urns for heating milk, soup or the like. 

XVI-8516-3 



• 85.16 

(6) Crepe makers. 

(7) Waffle irons. 

(8) Plate warmers and food warmers. 

(9) Sauté pans and chip pans (deep fryers). 

(10) Coffee roasting appliances. 

(11) Bottle heaters. 

(12) Yogurt and cheese makers. 

(13) Sterilising apparatus for preparing preserves. 

(14) Popcorn cookers. 

• (15) Face dryers and the like. 

(16) Facial saunas incorporating a face mask in which water is vaporised for facial skin 
treatment. 

(17) Towel airers and heated towel rails. 

(18) Bed warmers. 

(19) Perfume or incense heaters, and heaters for diffusing insecticides. 

(20) Non-mechanical wash boilers. 
This group excludes : 

(a) Electrically warmed blankets, bed pads, footmuffs or the like; electrically warmed clothing footwear 
or ear pads or other electrically warmed articles worn on or about the person (classified in their 
appropriate heading, see Chapter Note 1). 

(b) Roller type ironing machines (heading 84.20) and clothes ironing or pressing machines 
(heading 84.51). 

(c) Counter-type coffee percolators, tea or milk urns, sauté pans and chip pans used, for example, in chip 
shops and- other thermo-electric appliances which are not normally used in the household 
(heading 84.19, etc.). 

(d) Industrial microwave furnaces, ovens and equipment (for example, microwave ovens of a type 
designed to be used in restaurants) (heading 85.14). 

(e) Furniture (e.g., linen cupboards and serving trollies) equipped with heating elements (Chapter 94). 

(0 Cigarette lighters, gas lighters and the like (heading 96.13). 

XVI-8516-4 



85.16 • 
(F) E ECTRIC HEATING RESISTORS 

With the exception of those of carbon (heading 85.45), all electrical heating resistors are 
classified here, irrespective o the classification of the apparatus or equipment in which they are 
to be used. 

They consist of bars, rods, p tes, etc., or lengths of wire (usually coiled), of special material 
which becomes very hot wh n current is passed through it. The material used varies (special 
alloys, compositions based n silicon carbide, etc.). They may be obtained in the form of 
individual components by a p nting process. 

Wire resistors are usually m unted on insulating formers (e.g., of ceramics, steatite, mica or 
plastics) or on soft insulating ore (e.g., of glass fibres or asbestos). If not mounted, wire of this 
kind is classified here only if ut to length and coiled or otherwise formed to a shape identifying 
it as a heating resistor elemen . The same applies to bars, rods and plates which, to be classified 
here, must be cut to length or size ready for use. 

Resistors remain classified h e even if specialised for a particular machine or apparatus, but if 
assembled with parts other t an a simple insulated former and electrical connections they are 
classified as parts of the mac nes or apparatus in question (e.g., base plates for smoothing irons 
and plates for electric cookers • 
The heading also excludes de sters and demisters. These consist of a resistance wire mounted in a 
frame for fitting to the windscre . (heading 85.12). 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

• 

XVI-8516-5 



s 85.17 

85.17 - Telephone sets, including telephones for cellular networks or for other wireless 
networks; other apparatus for the transmission or reception of voice, images or 
other data, including apparatus for communication in a wired or wireless network 
(such as a local or wide area network), other than transmission or reception 
apparatus of heading 84.43, 85.25, 85.27 or 85.28 (+). 

- Telephone sets, including telephones for cellular networks or for other 
wireless networks : 

8517.11 - - Line telephone sets with cordless handsets 

8517.12 - - Telephones for cellular networks or for other wireless networks 

8517.18 - - Other 

- Other apparatus for transmission or reception of voice, images or other data, 
including apparatus for communication in a wired or wireless network (such 
as a local or wide area network) : 

8517.61 - - Base stations 

8517.62 - - Machines for the reception, conversion and transmission or regeneration of 
voice, images or other data, including switching and routing apparatus 

8517.69 - - Other 

8517.70 - Parts 

This heading covers apparatus for the transmission or reception of speech or other sounds, 
images or other data between two points by variation of an electric current or optical wave 
flowing in a wired network or by electro-magnetic waves in a wireless network. The signal may 
be analogue or digital. The networks, which may be interconnected, include telephony, 
telegraphy, radio-telephony, radio-telegraphy, local and wide area networks. 

(I) TELEPHONE SETS, INCLUDING TELEPHONES 
FOR CELLULARNETWORKS OR 

FOR OTHER WIRELESS NETWORKS 

This group includes : 

(A) Line telephone sets. 

Line telephone sets are communication apparatus that convert voice into signals for 
transmission to another device. Upon receipt of a signal, a line telephone set will convert 
the signal back to voice. They consist of : 

(1) The transmitter, a microphone which converts sound waves into a modulated current. 

(2) The receiver (headphone or earphone), which reconverts the modulated current into 
sound waves. In most cases, the transmitter and receiver are incorporated in a single 
moulding known as a hand-set. In other cases the transmitter and receiver are a 
combined headphone and microphone, designed to be worn on the user's head. 

• 
XVI-8517-1 



85.17 • 
(3) The anti-sidetone  ci cuit, which prevents sound introduced in the transmitter from 

being reproduced in t e receiver of the same hand-set. 

(4) The ringer, which gi es warning of a call. These may be tone ringers which produce 
their sound electroni ally or mechanical ringers such as a bell or a buzzer. Some 
telephone sets incorp a rate a light or lamp which operates in conjunction with the ringer 
to provide a visual si al indicating an incoming call. 

(5) The switching device or "switch hook", which interrupts or permits the flow of current 
from the network. It is usually operated by the hand-set being removed from or 
returned to a cradle. 

(6) The dialling selecto which enables the caller to obtain a connection. The selector 
may be of the push-b tton or keypad (tone) type or of the drum or rotary (pulse) type. 

When separately presente •, microphones and receivers (whether or not combined as hand-
sets), and loudspeakers are classified in heading 85.18 while bells and buzzers are 
classified in heading 85. 1. 

Telephone sets may inc rporate or have fitted : a memory for storing and recalling 
telephone numbers; a vi ual display for showing the number dialled, incoming caller's 
number, date and time, nd duration of a call; an extra loudspeaker and microphone to 
enable communication ithout using the hand-set; devices for automatically answering 
calls, transmitting a recor •ed message, recording incoming messages and playing back the 
recorded message on  •o mmand; devices for holding a connection on line while 
communicating with a p rson on another telephone. Telephone sets incorporating these 
devices may also have eys or push-buttons which enable their operation, including a 
switching key which ena les the telephone to be operated without removing the hand-set 
from the cradle. Many •f  these devices utilise a microprocessor or digital integrated 
circuits for their operatic) 

The heading covers all ki ds of telephone sets including : 

(i) Cordless telephone s s which comprise a battery powered radio frequency transceiver 
hand-set which inco orates a dialling selector, switching key and a radio frequency 
transceiver base unit which is connected by line to the telephone network (other 
cordless telephone se may not have hand-set but comprise a combined headphone and 
microphone which connected to a portable combined battery powered radio 
frequency transceiver dialling selector and switching key). 

(ii) Telephone sets whic comprise a combined dialling selector and switching key unit 
(which is connected line to the telephone network) and a combined headphone and 
microphone, presente together. 

(B) Telephones for cellular etworks or for other wireless networks. 

This group covers telep ones for use on any wireless network. Such telephones receive 
and emit radio waves hich are received and retransmitted, e.g., by base stations or 
satellites. 

These include, inter alia : 

(1) Cellular phones or m bile phones. 

(2) Satellite phones. 

XVI-8517-2 



• 85.17 

(II) OTHER APPARATUS FOR TRANSMISSION OR RECEPTION OF VOICE, 
IMAGES OR OTHER DATA, INCLUDING APPARATUS 

FOR COMMUNICATION IN A WIRED OR WIRELESS NETWORK 
(SUCH AS A LOCAL OR WIDE AREA NETWORK) 

(A) Base stations. 

The most common types of base stations are those for cellular networks, which receive and 
transmit radio waves to and from cellular telephones or to other wired or wireless 
networks. Each base station covers a geographical area (a cell). If the user moves from one 
cell to another while telephoning, the call is automatically transferred from one cell to 
another without interruption. 

(B) Entry-phone systems. 

These systems usually consist of a telephone handset and keypad or a loudspeaker, a 
microphone and keys. These systems are usually mounted at the entrance of buildings 
housing a number of tenants. With these systems, visitors can call certain tenants, by 
pressing the appropriate keys and talk to them. 

• (C) Videophones. 

Videophones for buildings, which are a combination consisting principally of a telephone 
set for line telephony, a television camera and a television receiver (transmission by line). 

(D) Apparatus for telegraphic communication other than facsimile machines of 
heading 84.43. 

These apparatus are essentially designed for converting characters, graphics, images or 
other data into appropriate electrical impulses, for transmitting those impulses, and at the 
receiving end, receiving these impulses and converting them either into conventional 
symbols or indications representing the characters, graphics, images or other data or into 
the characters, graphics, images or other data themselves. 

Examples are : 

(1) Apparatus for transmitting messages, such as dial or keyboard transmitters and 
automatic transmitters (e.g., teleprinter or teletypewriter transmitters). 

(2) Apparatus for receiving messages (e.g., teletypewriter receivers). In some cases the 
receiver and the transmitter apparatus are combined into one receiver-transmitter. 

(3) Picture telegraphic apparatus. The ancillary photographic equipment used with this 
apparatus (e.g., developing equipment) falls in Chapter 90. 

XVI-8517-3 



85.17 • 
(E) Telephonic or Telegrap is Switching Apparatus. 

(1) Automatic switchb ards and exchanges. 

These are of many types. The key feature of a switching system is the ability 
to provide, in res onse to coded signals, an automatic connection between 
users. Automatic s itchboards and exchanges may operate by means of circuit 
switching, message witching or packet switching which utilize microprocessors to 
connect users by e ectronic means. Many automatic switchboards and exchanges 
incorporate analogu to digital converters, digital to analogue converters, data 
compression/decom ression devices (codecs), modems, multiplexors, automatic data 
processing machine and other devices that permit the simultaneous transmission of 
both analogue and • igital signals over the network, which enables the integrated 
transmission of spee h, other sounds, characters, graphics, images or other data. 

Some types of auto atic switchboards and exchanges consist essentially of selectors, 
which select the line corresponding to the impulses received from the calling sets and 
establish the conne tion. They are operated automatically, either directly by the 
impulses from the ca ling set or via auxiliary apparatus such as directors. 

The different types f selectors (pre-selectors, intermediate selectors, final selectors) 
and, where used, the directors, are often assembled in series and in groups of the same 
type on chassis w ich are then incorporated into the exchange on metal racks. • 
Particularly in smal er-sized installations they may, however, all be mounted on a 
single rack to form a self-contained automatic exchange. 

Automatic switchb ards and exchanges may also incorporate such facilities as 
abbreviated dialling, call waiting, call forwarding, multi-party calling, voice mail, etc. 
These facilities are accessed from the user's telephone set through the telephone 
network. 

They are used for t e public network or for private networks that utilise a private 
branch exchange ( BX) which is connected to the public network. Automatic 
switchboards and ex hanges may also be equipped with consoles similar to telephone 
sets for when interv. tion or service by an operator is required. 

(2) Non-automatic swi chboards and exchanges. 

These consist of a f me on which are mounted the various manual switching devices. 
They require an ope ator to manually connect each call received by the switchboard or 
exchange. They co prise "call" or "clear" indicators for signalling that a call is being 
made or is compl ted; operators' telephone sets (sometimes specially mounted); 
switching devices ( ounted jacks or sockets and plugs connected to a cord); and key 
switches electrically connected to the plugs and cords to enable the operator to answer 
the caller, supervise he progress of the call and note its completion. • 

• 
XVI-8517-4 



85.17 

e 
(F) Transmitting and receiving apparatus for radio-telephony and radio-telegraphy. 

This group includes : 

(1) Fixed apparatus for radio-telephony and radio-telegraphy (transmitters, receivers and 
transmitter-receivers). Certain types, used mainly in large installations, include special 
devices such as secrecy devices (e.g., spectrum inverters), multiplex devices (used for 
sending more than two messages simultaneously) and certain receivers, termed 
"diversity receivers", using multiple receiver technique to overcome fading. 

(2) Radio transmitters and radio receivers for simultaneous interpretation at multilingual 
conferences. 

(3) Automatic transmitters and special receivers for distress signals from ships, aircraft, 
etc. 

(4) Transmitters, receivers or transmitter/receivers of telemetric signals. 

(5) Radio-telephony apparatus, including radio-telephony receivers, for motor vehicles, 
ships, aircraft, trains, etc. 

(6) Portable receivers, usually battery operated, for example, portable receivers for calling, 
alerting or paging. 

(G) Other communication apparatus. 

This group includes apparatus which allows for the connection to a wired or wireless 
communication network or the transmission or reception of speech or other sounds, images 
or other data within such a network. 

Communication networks include, inter alia, carrier-current line systems, digital-line 
systems and combinations thereof They may be configured, for example, as public 
switched telephone networks, Local Area Networks (LAN), Metropolitan Area Networks 
(MAN) and Wide Area Networks (WAN), whether proprietary or open architecture. 

This group includes : 

(1) Network interface cards (e.g., Ethernet interface cards). 

(2) Modems (combined modulators-demodulators). 

(3) Routers, bridges, hubs, repeaters and channel to channel adaptors. 

e (4) Multiplexers and related line equipment (e.g., transmitters, receivers or electro-optical 
converters). 

(5) Codecs (data compressors/decompressors) which have the capability of transmission 
and reception of digital information. 

(6) Pulse to tone converters which convert pulse dialled signals to tone signals. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the apparatus of this heading are also classified here. 

• 
XVI-8517-5 



85.17 • 
The heading also excludes : 

(a) Facsimile machines (headin 84.43). 

(b) Perforating machines, whe er or not electric, used to perforate paper bands ready for use in 
automatic telegraphic appar s (heading 84.72). 

(c) Induction coils for insertion n telephone or telegraph line circuits (heading 85.04). 

(d) Cells, batteries and accumul tors (heading 85.06 or 85.07). 

(e) Telephone answering machi es designed to operate with a telephone set but not forming an integral 
part of the set (heading 85.1 

(f) Apparatus for the trans ission or reception of radio-broadcasting or television signals 
(headings 85.25, 85.27 or 8 .28). 

(g) Electric bells or indicator (e.g., luminous indicators operated by the dial of a telephone) 
(heading 85.31). 

(h) Relays and switching eq ipment, such as selectors for automatic telephone exchanges, of 
heading 8536. 

(ij) Insulated electric wire, cabl , etc., as well as qptical fibre cables, made up of individually sheathed 
fibres, whether or not fi ed with connectors, including cords with plugs for switchboards 
(heading 85.44). 

(k) Telecommunication satellite (heading 88.02). 

(1) Telephone call registers and ounters (Chapter 90). 

(m) Carrier-current and other tra smitters and receivers which form a single unit with analogue or digital 
telemetering instruments or pparatus, or which, together with the latter, constitute a functional unit 
within the meaning of Note to Chapter 90 (Chapter 90). 

(n) Calculographs (time recorde s) (heading 91.06). 

(o) Monopods, bipods, tripods d similar articles (heading 96.20). 
0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 8517.62 

This subheading includes cordle s handsets or base units, when presented separately. 

XVI-8517-6 



• 85.18 

85.18 - Microphones and stands therefor; loudspeakers, whether or not mounted in their 
enclosures; headphones and earphones, whether or not combined with a 
microphone, and sets consisting of a microphone and one or more loudspeakers; 
audio-frequency electric amplifiers; electric sound amplifier sets. 

8518.10 - Microphones and stands therefor 

- Loudspeakers, whether or not mounted in their enclosures : 

8518.21 - - Single loudspeakers, mounted in their enclosures 

8518.22 - - Multiple loudspeakers, mounted in the same enclosure 

8518.29 - - Other 

8518.30 - Headphones and earphones, whether or not combined with a microphone, 
and sets consisting of a microphone and one or more loudspeakers 

8518.40 - Audio-frequency electric amplifiers 

8518.50 - Electric sound amplifier sets 

8518.90 - Parts 

This heading covers microphones, loudspeakers, headphones, earphones and audio-frequency 
electric amplifiers of all kinds presented separately, regardless of the particular purpose for 
which such apparatus may be designed (e.g., telephone microphones, headphones and 
earphones, and radio receiver loudspeakers). 

The heading also covers electric sound amplifier sets. 

(A) MICROPHONES AND STANDS THEREFOR 

Microphones convert sound vibrations into corresponding variations or oscillations of electric 
current, thus enabling them to be transmitted, broadcast or recorded. According to their working 
principle, they include : 

(1) Carbon microphones. These depend on the variations in the electrical resistance of carbon 
granules, caused by differences in the pressure exerted upon them when the diaphragm is 
displaced by sound waves. The carbon granules (orpowder) are packed in a container 
between two electrodes, one of which constitutes or is fixed to the diaphragm. 

(2) Piezo-electric microphones, in which the pressure of the sound waves, transmitted by 
means of a diaphragm, sets up strains in a specially cut piece of crystal (e.g., quartz or rock 
crystal), thus causing the production of electric charges on the crystal. This type of element 
is often used in the "contact" microphone that is used in the pick-up of acoustic musical 
instruments such as guitars, pianos, brass and string orchestral instruments etc. 

(3) Moving coil or ribbon microphones (also known as dynamic microphones), in which the 
sound vibrations are brought to bear on a coil or an aluminium ribbon situated in a 
magnetic field, thus producing electric impulses by induction. 

(4) Capacitance or electrostatic (condenser) microphones, containing two plates (or 
electrodes), one fixed (the backplate) and one able to vibrate (the diaphragm), with an air 
gap between the two. The sound waves produce differences in capacity between the two 
plates. 

XVI-8518-1 



85.18 • 
(5) Thermal or hot wire mi rophones, containing a heated resistance wire, the temperature 

of which, and therefore th resistance, is varied by the effect of the sound waves. 

This heading also covers wire ss microphone sets, each set consisting of one or more wireless 
microphones and a wireless r ceiver. The wireless microphone transmits a signal representing 
the sound waves it receives, b means of radio-transmission circuitry and an internal or external 
aerial. The receiver has one o more aerials to receive the transmitted radio waves and internal 
circuitry to convert the radio ayes to an electrical audio signal, and may have one or more 
volume controls and output pl gs. 

There are many varied app ications of microphones (e.g., in public address equipment; 
telephony; sound recording; a craft or submarine detectors; trench listening devices; study of 
heart beats). 

Generally the electric current output from microphones is in the form of an analogue signal, 
however some microphones i corporate an analogue to digital converter where the output is in 
the form of a digital signal. M crophones are sometimes rendered more sensitive by the addition 
of amplifiers (usually referre to as pre-amplifiers). Capacitors are sometimes fitted for tone 
correction. Some microphones require an electrical power supply for their operation. This power 
supply may be supplied from mixing console or the sound recording apparatus or it may be in 
the form of a separate power ack. Power packs presented separately are not classified in this 
heading (generally heading 5.04). Microphones are also sometimes fitted with devices for 
concentrating the sound wave and may have, as in the case of public address microphones, 
special stands for placing o a table, a desk, etc., or on the ground, or from which the 
microphones are suspended. uch stands or devices fall in this heading, even if presented 
separately, provided they ar of a kind specially designed for use with or for fitting to 
microphones. 

On the other hand, monopods, bi ods, tripods and similar articles are excluded (heading 96.20). 

(B) LOUDSP AKERS, WHETHER OR NOT MOUNTED 
IN THEIR ENCLOSURES 

The function of loudspeakers s the converse of that of microphones : they reproduce sound by 
converting electrical variatio s or oscillations from an amplifier into mechanical vibrations 
which are communicated to th air. They include the following types : 

(1) Moving iron or moving oil loudspeakers. In the moving iron loudspeaker an armature or 
reed of soft iron is placed in the field of a permanent magnet and under the influence of the 
coils in which the curre passes. The field varies in accordance with this current, and a 
diaphragm fixed to the a ature or reed sets up corresponding vibrations in the air. Moving 
coil loudspeakers consist ssentially of a coil which is placed in the field of a permanent or 
electro-magnet and whic is energised by the varying current. The coil is rigidly connected 
to a diaphragm. 

(2) Piezo-electric loudspea rs, based on the principle that certain natural or artificial crystals 
are subject to mechanic 1 distortion when an electric current is applied to them. Such 
loudspeakers are usually own as "crystal loudspeakers". 

XVI-8518-2 



• 85.18 

(3) Electrostatic loudspeakers (also known as condenser-type loudspeakers). These depend 
on the electrostatic reactions between two plates (or electrodes), one plate serving as a 
diaphragm. 

Matching transformers and amplifiers are sometimes mounted together with loudspeakers. 
Generally the electrical input signal received by loudspeakers is in analogue form, however in 
some cases the input signal is in digital format. Such loudspeakers incorporate digital to 
analogue converters and amplifiers from which the mechanical vibrations are communicated to 
the air. 

Loudspeakers may be mounted on frames, chassis or in cabinets of different types (often 
acoustically designed), or even in articles of furniture. They remain classified in this heading 
provided the main function of the whole is to act as a loudspeaker. Separately presented frames, 
chassis, cabinets, etc., also fall in this heading provided they are identifiable as being mainly 
designed for mounting loudspeakers; articles of furniture of Chapter 94 designed to receive 
loudspeakers in addition to their normal function remain classified in Chapter 94. 

The heading includes loudspeakers designed for connection to an automatic data processing 
machine, when presented separately. 

• (C) HEADPHONES AND EARPHONES, WHETHER OR NOT COMBINED 
WITH A MICROPHONE, AND SETS CONSISTING OF A MICROPHONE 

AND ONE OR MORE LOUDSPEAKERS 

Headphones and earphones are electroacoustic receivers used to produce low-intensity sound 
signals. Like loudspeakers, described above, they transform an electrical effect into an acoustic 
effect; the means used are the same in both cases, the only difference being in the powers 
involved. 

The heading covers headphones and earphones, whether or not combined with a microphone, 
for telephony or telegraphy; headsets consisting of a special throat microphone and 
permanently-fixed earphones (used, for example, in aviation); line telephone handsets which are 
combined microphone/speaker sets for telephony and which are generally used by telephone 
operators; headphones and earphones for plugging into radio or television receivers, sound 
reproducing apparatus or automatic data processing machines. 

The heading also covers sets consisting of a microphone and one or more loudspeakers which 
may be fitted together. A headphone or earphone may be included with the set for private 
listening. These sets are designed to be plugged into or connected to a central control system 
which includes an amplifier. These units may be used by participants at meetings or 
conferences. 

The heading also includes prenatal listening apparatus which generally consist of a microphone, 
a headphone, a loudspeaker, a listening cone, on/off/volume control and battery compartment. 
This apparatus makes it possible to hear the sounds of a foetus as well as the mother's heartbeat. 
This apparatus does not include a sound recording device. The apparatus is designed for non-
medical use. 

However, electro-diagnostic apparatus of a type designed for use by professionals in medical, surgical or 
veterinary sciences is classified in heading 90.18. 

XVI-8518-3 



  

85.18 • 
(D) AUDIO- REQUENCY ELECTRIC AMPLIFIERS 

Audio-frequency amplifiers a e used for the amplification of electrical signals of frequencies 
falling within the range of t e human ear. The great majority are based on transistors or 
integrated circuits, but some a e still based on thermionic valves. They are generally powered by 
a built-in power pack which ay be fed from the mains or, particularly in the case of portable 
amplifiers, from electric accu ulators or batteries. 

The input signals to audio-fr quency amplifiers may be derived from a microphone, a laser 
optical disc reader, a pick-up artridge, a magnetic tape head, a radio feeder unit, a film sound 
track head or some other so ce of audio-frequency electric signals. Generally speaking, the 
output is fed into a loudspeak r, but this is not always the case (pre-amplifiers can feed into a 
succeeding amplifier or be inc rporated in an amplifier). 

Audio-frequency amplifiers y contain a volume control for varying the gain of the amplifier, 
and also commonly mcorpora controls (bass boost, treble lift, etc.) for varying their frequency 
response. 

The heading includes audi -frequency amplifiers used as repeaters in telephony or as 
measurement amplifiers. 

High or intermediate frequency	 plifiers are classified in heading 85.43 as electrical appliances having 
an individual function. Audio mi ers and equalisers are also classified in heading 85.43. 

(E) EL CTRIC SOUND AMPLIFIER SETS 

This heading also covers am lifier sets consisting of microphones, audio-frequency amplifiers 
and loudspeakers. This type f equipment is extensively used for public entertainment, public 
address systems, advertising ehicles, police vehicles or with certain musical instruments, etc. 
Similar systems are also used on large lorries (particularly those with trailers) for enabling the 
driver to hear irregular noises or sound signals from behind, which otherwise he could not hear 
above the sound of the engine 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Airmen's headgear incorpor ting headphones with or without a microphone (heading 65.06). 

(b) Telephone sets (heading 85. 7). 

(c) Hearing aids of heading 90. 1. 

XVI-8518-4 



• 85.19 

85.19 - Sound recording or reproducing apparatus (+). 

8519.20 - Apparatus operated by coins, banknotes, bank cards, tokens or by other 
means of payment 

8519.30 - Turntables (record-decks) 

8519.50 - Telephone answering machines 

- Other apparatus : 

8519.81 - - Using magnetic, optical or semiconductor media 

8519.89 - - Other 

This heading covers apparatus for recording sound, apparatus for reproducing sound and 
apparatus that is capable of both recording and reproducing sound. Generally, sound is recorded 
onto or reproduced from an internal storage device or media (e.g., magnetic tape, optical media, 
semiconductor media or other media of heading 85.23). 

Sound recording apparatus modify a recording medium so that sound reproducing 
apparatus can subsequently reproduce the original sound-wave (speech, music, etc.). This 
includes recording based on the receipt of a sound-wave or by other methods, e.g., by recording 
data sound files, downloaded from an Internetpage or a compact disc by an automatic data 
processing machine, onto the internal memory (e.g., flash memory) of a digital audio device 
(e.g., MP3 player). Devices which record sound as digital code generally are not capable of 
reproducing sound unless they incorporate a means for converting the recording from digital 
code to an analogue signal. 

(I) APPARATUS OPERATED BY COINS, BANKNOTES, BANK CARDS, 
TOKENS OR BY OTHER MEANS OF PAYMENT 

These apparatus operate by coins, banknotes, bank cards, tokens or other means of payment and 
allow for the selection and playing of audio recordings in a chosen sequence or randomly. They 
are commonly referred to as "juke boxes". 

(II) TURNTABLES (RECORD-DECKS) 

These apparatus rotate the discs mechanically or electrically. They may or may not incorporate 
a sound-head, but they do not include an acoustic device nor electrical means of amplifying 
sound (see "record players" below). They may be fitted with an automatic device enabling a 
series of records to be played in succession. 

(III) TELEPHONE ANSWERING MACHINES 

These apparatus are designed to operate in conjunction with a telephone set (but not forming an 
Integral part of the set). They transmit a previously recorded message and may have the 
capability to record incoming messages left by callers. 

XVI-8519-1 



85.19 • 
(IV) OTHER AP t ARATUS USING MAGNETIC, OPTICAL OR 

SEMICONDUCTOR MEDIA 

The apparatus of this group ay be portable. They may also be equipped with, or designed to 
be attached to acoustic device (loudspeakers, earphones, headphones) and an amplifier. 

(A) Apparatus using magne c media 

This group includes appa tus which use tapes or other magnetic media. Sound is recorded 
by altering the magnetic roperties of the media. The sound is reproduced by passing the 
medium in front of a agnetic sound-head. Examples include cassette-players, tape 
recorders and cassette rec rders. 

(B) Apparatus using optical media 

This group includes app atus which use optical media. Sound is recorded as digital code 
converted from amplifie currents of variable intensity (analogue signal) onto the surface 
of the recording mediu . Sound is reproduced using a laser to read such medium. 
Examples include comp , ct disc players and minidisc players. These types also cover 
apparatus which uses me is combining magnetic and optical technologies. An example of 
such an apparatus uses m gneto-optical discs, on which the areas of varying reflectivity are 
created using a magnetic echnology but are read using an optical (e.g., laser) beam. 

(C) Apparatus using semico ductor media 

This group includes ap • atus which use semiconductor (e.g., solid-state non- volatile) 
media. Sound is recors d as digital code converted from amplified currents of variable 
intensity (analogue signa ) on the recording medium. Sound is reproduced by reading such 
medium. The semicond ctor media may be permanently installed in the apparatus or may 
be in the form of remova le solid-state non-volatile storage media. Examples include flash 
memory audio players .g., certain MP3 players) which are portable battery operated 
apparatus consisting ess ntially of a housing incorporating a flash memory (internal or 
removable), a micropr cessor, an electronic system including an audio-frequency 
amplifier, an LCD scree and control buttons. The microprocessor is programmed to use 
MP3 or similar file fo ats. The apparatus can be connected to an automatic data 
processing machine for d •wnloading MP3 or similar files. 

(D) Apparatus using any co bination of magnetic, optical or semiconductor media 

These apparatus incorp ate devices which are capable of recording or reproducing by 
using any two or all of m gnetic, optical or semiconductor media. 

(V) OTHER SOUND RE ORDING OR SOUND REPRODUCING APPARATUS 

This group includes : 

(1) Record players. These •paratus produce sound from records (grooved discs) by electric 
amplifiers and loudsp ;w1 ers, mechanical vibrations being converted into electrical 
vibrations by a sound-h ad (pick-up cartridge). They may be fitted with an automatic 
device enabling a series f records to be played in succession. 

XVI-8519-2 



• 85.19 

(2) Cinematographic sound recording apparatus which record sound by photoelectrical 
methods. Sound may be photoelectrically recorded on film as a strip, either (a) of variable 
area or (b) of variable density. 

Cinematographic sound recording apparatus comprises, in addition to the sound recording 
head, a magazine for holding the film, a motor driving mechanism for synchronising the 
speed of the film with that of the cinematographic camera working with it, and a film 
transport mechanism. 

(3) Cinematographic sound reproducers. These are equipped with a reader which 
incorporates a photoelectric sound-head and a charge-coupled device. 

(4) Re-recording apparatus, for cinematography, used, for example, for photoelectric or 
digital rerecording of sound tracks recorded by other means, e.g., magnetically, optically, 
or electronically. 

* * 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts and accessories of the apparatus of this heading are 
classified in heading 85.22. 

* 
* * 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Presses or injection moulding machinery for replicating recorded optical discs of plastics 
(heading 84.77). 

(b) Telephone answering machines forming an integral part of a telephone set (heading 85.17). 

(c) Separately presented microphones, loudspeakers, audio-frequency electric amplifiers and electric 
sound amplifier sets (heading 85.18). 

(d) Video recording or reproducing apparatus of heading 85.21. 

(e) Sound recording or reproducing apparatus combined in the same housing with reception apparatus 
for radio-broadcasting (heading 85.27). 

(f) Sound recording or reproducing apparatus combined with television receivers (heading 85.28). 

(g) Cinematographic cameras and projectors combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus 
(heading 90.07). 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 8519.81 

This subheading covers apparatus using one or more of the following : magnetic, optical or 
semiconductor media. 

XVI-8519-3 



85.20 

[85.20] 

XVI-8520-1 



85.21 

85.21 - Video recording or reproducing apparatus, whether or not incorporating a video 
tuner. 

8521.10 - Magnetic tape-type 

8521.90 - Other 

(A) RECORDING AND COMBINED RECORDING 
AND REPRODUCING APPARATUS 

These are apparatus which, when connected to a television camera or a television receiver, 
record on media electric impulses (analogue signals) or analogue signals converted into digital 
code (or a combination of these) which correspond to the images and sound captured by a 
television camera or received by a television receiver. Generally the images and sound are 
recorded on the same media. The method of recording can be by magnetic or optical means and 
the recording media is usually tapes or discs. 

The heading also includes apparatus which record, generally on a magnetic disc, digital code 
representing video images and sound, by transferring the digital code from an automatic data 
processing machine (e.g., digital video recorders). 

In magnetic recording on tape the images and sound are recorded on different tracks on the tape 
whereas in magnetic recording on disc the images and sound are recorded as magnetic patterns 
or spots in spiral tracks on the surface of the disc. 

In optical recording, digital data representing the images and sound are encoded by a laser onto 
a disc. 

Video recording apparatus which receive signals from a television receiver also incorporate a 
tuner which enables selection of the desired signal (or channel) from the frequency band of 
signals transmitted by the television transmitting station. 

When used for reproduction, the apparatus convert the recording into video signals. These 
signals are passed on either to a transmitting station or to a television receiver. 

(B) REPRODUCING APPARATUS 

These apparatus are designed only to reproduce images and sound directly on a television 
receiver. The media to be used in these instruments are prerecorded mechanically, magnetically 
or optically on special recording equipment. The following are examples of such apparatus : 

(1) Apparatus using discs in which the image and sound data are stored on the disc by various 
methods and picked up by a laser optical reading system, capacitive sensor, pressure sensor 
or magnetic head. Subject to Note 3 to Section XVI, apparatus which are capable of 
reproducing both video and audio recordings are to be classified in this heading. 

(2) Apparatus that decodes and converts into a video signal image data recorded on a light 
sensitive film (the sound being recorded by a magnetic process on the same film). 

XVI-8521-1 



85.21 • 
ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts and accessories of the apparatus of this heading are 
classified in heading 85.22. 

The heading excludes : 

(a) The recording media of hea ing 85.23. 

(b) Video cameras (heading 85. 5). 

(c) Reception apparatus for tele ision (whether or not incorporating radio-broadcast receivers or sound 
or video recording or r roducing apparatus) and video monitors and video projectors 
(heading 85.28). 

• 

XVI-8521-2 



• 85.22 

85.22 - Parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of 
heading 85.19 or 85.21. 

8522.10 - Pick-up cartridges 

8522.90 - Other 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), this heading covers parts and accessories suitable for use 
solely or principally with the apparatus of heading 85.19 or 85.21. 

The range of parts and accessories classified here includes : 

(1) Pick-up cartridges for discs or mechanically recorded sound films. These convert 
mechanical vibrations (obtained with a stylus which follows the groove in the recorded 
medium) into electrical impulses. 

(2) Laser optical reading systems. 

e (3) Magnetic type sound-heads for recording, play-back or erasing. 

(4) Cassette shaped adapters which enable sound reproduction from a portable optical disc 
player through a magnetic tape player. 

(5) Photoelectric sound-heads. 

(6) Apparatus for winding or unwinding tapes. Essentially this apparatus usually consists of 
two reel supporting brackets, at least one of which is fitted with a device enabling it to be 
rotated. 

(7)  Tone-arms, tables for turntables. 

(8)  Mounted or unmounted worked sapphires and diamonds for styli. 

(9)  Record cutters. These are component parts of the recording apparatus. They convert sound 
vibrations into mechanical vibrations and modify the shape of the groove. 

(10) Furniture, specially designed and constructed for sound recording or reproducing 
apparatus. 

(11) Cassettes for cleaning the magnetic heads of sound or video recording or reproducing 
apparatus, whether or not put up in retail packings together with a cleaning solution. 

(12) Other specialised parts and accessories for magnetic sound recording or reproducing 
apparatus, e.g., magnetic erasing heads and bars and erasing machines; magnetic 
needle-points; scales showing point reached in dictation. 

(13) Other specialised parts and accessories for video recording or reproducing apparatus, 
e.g., video signal recording head drums; vacuum devices for maintaining the magnetic tape in 
contact with the recording heads or pick-ups; tape-winding devices; etc. 

XVI-8522-1 



85.22 • 
The heading excludes : 

(a) Spools, reels or similar supp s rts, including video or audio cassettes without magnetic tape (classified 
according to their constituent material, for example, in Chapter 39 or Section XV). 

(b) Electric motors for sound rec s rding or reproducing apparatus, not combined with parts or accessories 
of such recording or reprodu sing apparatus (heading 85.01). 

(c) Recording media of heading 5.23. 

(d) Devices equipped with soun -heads which are used together with frame viewers on synchronisation 
tables (heading 90.10). 

• 

XVI-8522-2 



• 85.23 

85.23 - Discs, tapes, solid-state non-volatile storage devices, "smart cards" and other media 
for the recording of sound or of other phenomena, whether or not recorded, 
including matrices and masters for the production of discs, but excluding products 
of Chapter 37. 

- Magnetic media : 

8523.21 - - Cards incorporating a magnetic stripe 

8523.29 - - Other 

- Optical media : 

8523.41 - - Unrecorded 

8523.49 - - Other 

• - Semiconductor media : 

8523.51 - - Solid-state non-volatile storage devices 

8523.52 - - "Smart cards" 

8523.59 - - Other 

8523.80 - Other 

This heading covers different types of media, whether or not recorded, for the recording of 
sound or of other phenomena (e.g., numerical data; text; images, video or other graphical data; 
software). Such media are generally inserted into or removed from recording or reading 
apparatus and may be transferred from one recording or reading apparatus to another. 

The media of this heading may be presented recorded, unrecorded, or with some pre-recorded 
information, but capable of having more information recorded on them. 

This heading includes media in intermediate forms (e.g., matrices, master discs, mother discs, 
stamper discs) for use in the mass-production of finished recorded media. 

However, this heading does not include the device which records the data on the media or 
retrieves the data from the media. 

In particular, this heading covers : 

• (A) MAGNETIC MEDIA 

Products of this group are commonly in the form of discs, cards or tapes. They are made using 
different materials (generally plastics, paper or paperboard, or metal), either magnetic in 
themselves or coated with a magnetic material. This group includes, for example, cassette tapes 
and other tapes for tape recorders, tapes for camcorders and other video recording apparatus 
(e.g., VHS, Hi8TM,  mini-DV), diskettes and cards with a magnetic stripe. 

This group does not include magneto-optical media. 

• 
XVI-8523-1 



85.23 

(B) OPTICAL MEDIA 

Products of this group are ge erally in the form of discs made of glass, metal or plastics with 
one or more light-reflective la, ers. Any data (sound or other phenomena) stored on such discs 
are read by means of a laser e•a m. This group includes recorded discs and unrecorded discs 
whether or not rewritable. 

This group includes, for exa ple, compact discs (e.g., CDs, V-CDs, CD-ROMs, CD-RAMs), 
digital versatile discs (DVDs). 

This group also includes magn to-optical media. 

) SEMICONDUCTOR MEDIA 

Products of this group contain ne or more electronic integrated circuits. 

Thus, this group includes : 

(1) Solid-state, non-volatile data storage devices for recording data from an external 
source (see Note 5 (a) t i this Chapter). These devices (also known as "flash memory 
cards" or "flash electron c storage cards") are used for recording data from an external 
source, or providing da to, devices such as navigation and global positioning systems, 
data collection termina s, portable scanners, medical monitoring appliances, audio 
recording apparatus, pe sonal communicators, mobile phones, digital cameras and 
automatic data processor ; machines. Generally, the data are stored onto, and read from, 
the device once it has be connected to that particular appliance, but can also be uploaded 
onto or downloaded from an automatic data processing machine. 

The media use only pow r supplied from the appliances to which they are connected, and 
require no battery. 

These non-volatile data s • rage devices are comprised of, in the same housing, one or more 
flash memories ("FLAS E2PROM/EEPROM") in the form of integrated circuits mounted 
on a printed circuit boar , and incorporate a connecting socket to a host appliance. They 
may include capacitors, r sistors and a microcontroller in the form of an integrated circuit. 
Example of solid state no -volatile storage devices are USB flash drives. 

(2) "Smart cards" (see No e 5 (b) to this Chapter), which have embedded in them one or 
more electronic integrate circuits (a microprocessor, random access memory (RAM) or 
read-only memory (RO )) in the form of chips. "Smart cards" may contain contacts, a 
magnetic stripe or an e bedded antenna but do not contain any other active or passive 
circuit elements. 

These "smart cards" also nclude certain articles known as "proximity cards or tags" if they 
meet the conditions of N • to 5 (b) to this Chapter. Proximity cards/tags usually consist of an 
integrated circuit with a read only memory, which is attached to a printed antenna. The 
car tag operates by cre , ing a field interference (the nature of which is determined by a 
code contained in the ad only memory) at the antenna in order to affect a signal 
transmitted from, and re ected back to, the reader. This type of card/tag does not transmit 
data. 

XVI-8523-2 



85.23 

(D) OTHER 

This group includes gramophone records. 

This heading excludes : 

(a) Photographic or cinematographic films with one or several sound tracks (Chapter 37). 

(b) Sensitised film for photoelectric recording (heading 37.02). 

(c) Articles intended for use as media for recording sound or other phenomena but not yet prepared as 
such; these are classified in their respective headings (for example, in Chapter 39 or 48, or 
Section XV). 

(d) Data-bearing paper tapes or punch cards, the recording of which has been made usually by 
perforation (Chapter 48). 

(e) Certain electronic memory modules (e.g., SIMMs (Single In-Line Memory Modules) and DIMMs 
(Dual In-Line Memory Modules)) which are to be classified by application of Note 2 to Section XVI 
(see the General Explanatory Note to this Chapter). 

(0 Cartridges for game machines (heading 95.04). 

XVI-8523-3 



85.24 

[85.24] 

XVI-8524-1 



85.25 

85.25 - Transmission apparatus for radio-broadcasting or television, whether or not 
incorporating reception apparatus or sound recording or reproducing apparatus; 
television cameras, digital cameras and video camera recorders. 

8525.50 - Transmission apparatus 

8525.60 - Transmission apparatus incorporating reception apparatus 

8525.80 - Television cameras, digital cameras and video camera recorders 

(A) TRANSMISSION APPARATUS FOR RADIO-BROADCASTING 
OR TELEVISION, WHETHER OR NOT INCORPORATING 

RECEPTION APPARATUS OR SOUND RECORDING 
OR REPRODUCING APPARATUS 

The apparatus for radio-broadcasting falling in this group must be for the transmission of 
signals by means of electro-magnetic waves transmitted through the ether without any line 
connection. On the other hand television apparatus falls here whether the transmission is by 
electro-magnetic waves or by line. 

This group includes : 

(1) Transmitters for radio-broadcasting or television. 

(2) Relay apparatus used to pick up a broadcast and retransmit it and so increase the range 
(including television relay apparatus for mounting in aircraft). 

(3) Relay television transmitters for transmission, by means of an aerial and parabolic 
reflector, from the studio or site of an outside broadcast to the main transmitter. 

(4) Television transmitters for industrial use (e.g., for reading instruments at a distance, or for 
observation in dangerous localities). With this apparatus the transmission is often by line. 

(B) TELEVISION CAMERAS, DIGITAL CAMERAS AND 
VIDEO CAMERA RECORDERS 

This group covers cameras that capture images and convert them into an electronic signal that 
is : 

(1) transmitted as a video image to a location outside the camera for viewing or remote 
recording (i.e., television cameras); or 

(2) recorded in the camera as a still image or as a motion picture (i.e., digital cameras and 
video camera recorders). 

Many of the cameras of this heading may physically resemble the photographic cameras of 
heading 90.06 or the cinematographic cameras of heading 90.07. The cameras in heading 85.25 
and the cameras in Chapter 90 typically include optical lenses to focus the image on a light-
sensitive medium and adjustments to vary the amount of light entering the camera. However, 
photographic and cinematographic cameras of Chapter 90 expose images onto photographic 
film of Chapter 37, while the cameras of this heading convert the images into analogue or 
digital data. 

XVI-8525-1 



85.25 • 
The cameras of this heading apture an image by focusing the image onto a light-sensitive 
device, such as a complement metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) or charge-coupled device 
(CCD). The light-sensitive de ce sends an electrical representation of the images to be further 
processed into an analogue or igital record of the images. 

Television cameras may or m y not have an incorporated device for remote control of lens and 
diaphragm as well as for remo e control of the honzontal and vertical movement of the camera 
(e.g., television cameras for elevision studios or for reporting, those used for industrial or 
scientific purposes, in closed ircuit television (surveillance) or for supervising traffic). These 
cameras do not have any inbui t capability of recording images. 

Some of these cameras may also be used with automatic data processing machines (e.g., 
webcams). 

"Travelling", mobile mechanical quipment for television cameras, whether or not presented separately, 
is excluded from this heading (he ding 84.28). 

Also excluded from this headi is electrical equipment for long-distance control and focussing of 
television cameras, when present separately (heading 85.37). 

In digital cameras and video camera recorders, images are recorded onto an internal storage 
device or onto media (e.g., m gnetic tape, optical media, semiconductor media or other media 
of heading 85.23). They m y include an analogue/digital converter (ADC) and an output • 
terminal which provides the means to send images to units of automatic data processing 
machines, printers, television or other viewing machines. Some digital cameras and video 
camera recorders include inp terminals so that they can internally record analogue or digital 
image files from such external machines. 

Genera11 , the cameras of this group are equipped with an optical viewfinder or a liquid crystal 
display (LCD), or both. Many cameras equipped with an LCD can employ the display both as a 
viewfinder when capturing i ages and as a screen for displaying images received from other 
sources or for reproducing im es already recorded. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the apparatus of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.29. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Apparatus of heading 85.17. 

(b) Separately presented radio- roadcasting reception apparatus for incorporation in relay apparatus 
(heading 85.27). 

(c) Satellite television receivers nd satellite television reception systems (heading 85.28). 

(d) Special purpose vehicles pe anently equipped with radio-broadcasting or television transmitters of 
this heading (generally head g 87.05). 

(e) Telecommunication satellite (heading 88.02). 

XVI-8525-2 



• 85.26 

85.26 - Radar apparatus, radio navigational aid apparatus and radio remote control 
apparatus. 

8526.10 - Radar apparatus 

- Other : 

8526.91 - - Radio navigational aid apparatus 

8526.92 - - Radio remote control apparatus 

This heading includes : 

(1) Radio navigational aid equipment (e.g., radio beacons and radio buoys, with fixed or 
rotating aerials; receivers, including radio compasses equipped with multiple aerials or with 
a directional frame aerial). It also includes global positioning system (GPS) receivers. 

(2) Ship or aircraft navigational radar equipment (whether for mounting on the ship, aircraft, 

• etc., or on land), including port radar equipment, and identification equipment placed on 
buoys, beacons, etc. 

(3) Blind approach landing or traffic control apparatus for airports. These are very complex. 
Certain types combine normal radio, radar and television devices showing at the control 
point the position and height of aircraft in the neighbourhood, and transmitting to the 
aircraft both the necessary instructions for landing and the radar picture of other aircraft in 
the vicinity. 

(4) Radar height measuring apparatus (radio altimeters). 

(5) Meteorological radar for tracking storm clouds or meteorological balloons. 

(6) Blind bombing equipment. 

(7) Radar devices for proximity fuses of shells or bombs. 

The complete fuses with their detonator fall in heading 93.06. 

(8) Air raid warning radar apparatus. 

(9) Range and direction finding radar apparatus for naval or anti-aircraft guns. 

(10) Radar transponders; these receive radar pulses and transmit pulses often carrying 
superimposed intelligence in response to those it receives. Transponders are used on 
aircraft to enable them to be identified by radar operators, and in instrument balloons for 
the determination of range and direction and the transmission of meteorological 
information. 

(11) Radio apparatus for the remote control of ships, pilotless aircraft, rockets, missiles, toys, 
model ships or aircraft, etc. 

(12) Radio apparatus for the detonation of mines, or for the remote control of machines. 

XVI-8526-1 



85.26 • 
PARTS 

Subject to the general prov sions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts of the apparatus of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.29. 

* 
* * 

Special purpose vehicles perma ently equipped with radar or other apparatus of this heading are 
excluded (generally heading 87.0 

• 

XVI-8526-2 



85.27 

85.27 - Reception apparatus for radio-broadcasting, whether or not combined, in the same 
housing, with sound recording or reproducing apparatus or a clock. 

- Radio-broadcast receivers capable of operating without an external source of 
power : 

8527.12 - - Pocket-size radio cassette-players 

8527.13 - - Other apparatus combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus 

8527.19 - - Other 

- Radio-broadcast receivers not capable of operating without an external 
source of power, of a kind used in motor vehicles : 

8527.21 - - Combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus 

8527.29 - - Other 

- Other : 

8527.91 - - Combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus 

8527.92 - - Not combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus but 
combined with a clock 

8527.99 - - Other 

The sound radio-broadcasting apparatus falling in this heading must be for the reception of 
signals by means of electro-magnetic waves transmitted through the ether without any line 
connection. 

This group includes : 

(1) Domestic radio receivers of all kinds (table models, consoles, receivers for mounting in 
furniture, walls, etc., portable models, receivers, whether or not combined, in the same 
housing, with sound recording or reproducing apparatus or a clock). 

(2) Car radio receivers. 

(3) Separately presented reception apparatus for incorporation in relay apparatus of 
heading 85.25. 

(4) Pocket-size radio cassette-players (see Subheading Note 1 to this Chapter). 

(5) Stereo systems (hi-fi systems) containing a radio receiver, put up in sets for retail sale, 
consisting of modular units in their own separate housing, e.g., in combination with a CD 
player, a cassette recorder, an amplifier with equaliser, loudspeakers, etc. The radio 
receiver gives the system its essential character. 

XVI-8527-1 



85.27 

PARTS 

Subject to the general prov sions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section ►  VI), parts of the apparatus of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.29. 

* 
* * 

The heading excludes, inter alia : 

(a) Articles of heading 85.17 or .25. 

(b) Special purpose vehicles pe anently equipped with radio-broadcasting receivers of this heading 
(generally heading 87.05). 

XVI-8527-2 



85.28 

85.28 - Monitors and projectors, not incorporating television reception apparatus; reception 
apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio-broadcast receivers or 
sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus. 

- Cathode-ray tube monitors : 

8528.42 - - Capable of directly connecting to and designed for use with an automatic 
data processing machine of heading 84.71 

8528.49 - - Other 

- Other monitors : 

8528.52 - - Capable of directly connecting to and designed for use with an automatic 
data processing machine of heading 84.71 

8528.59 - - Other 

- Projectors : 

8528.62 - - Capable of directly connecting to and designed for use with an automatic 
data processing machine of heading 84.71 

8528.69 - - Other 

- Reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio-
broadcast receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus : 

8528.71 - - Not designed to incorporate a video display or screen 

8528.72 - - Other, colour 

8528.73 - - Other, monochrome 

This heading includes : 

(1) Monitors and projectors, not incorporating television reception apparatus. 

(2) Television reception apparatus, whether or not incorporating radio-broadcast receivers or 
sound or video recording or reproducing apparatus, for the display of signals (television 
sets). 

(3) Apparatus for the reception of television signals, without display capabilities (e.g., 
receivers of satellite television broadcasts). 

Monitors, projectors and television sets utilize different technologies, such as CRT (cathode-ray 
tube), LCD (liquid crystal display), DMD (digital micromirror device), OLED (organic 
light-emitting diodes) and plasma, to display images. 

Monitors and projectors may be capable of receiving a variety of signals from different sources. 
However, if they incorporate a television tuner they are considered to be reception apparatus for 
television. 

XVI-8528-1 



85.28 • 
(A) MONITORS CA ABLE OF DIRECTLY CONNECTING TO AND 
DESIGNED FOR US WITH AN AUTOMATIC DATA PROCESSING 

CHINE OF HEADING 84.71 

This group includes monitor which are capable of accepting a signal from the central 
processing unit of an automati data processing machine and provide a graphical presentation of 
the data processed. These i onitors are distinguishable from other types of monitors 
(see (B) below) and from telev sion receivers. 

The monitors of this group ma be characterised by the following features : 

(i) They usually display si als of graphics adaptors (monochrome or colour) which are 
integrated in the central rocessing unit of the automatic data processing machine; 

(ii) They do not incorporate channel selector or video tuner; 

(iii) They are fitted with co ectors characteristic of data processing systems (e.g., RS-232C 
interface, DIN, D-SUB, GA, DVI, HDMI or DP (display port) connectors); 

(iv) The viewable image siz of these monitors does not generally exceed 76 cm (30 inches); 

(v) They. have a display pith size (usually smaller than 0.3 mm) suitable for close proximity 
viewing; 

(vi) They may have an audio circuit and built-in speakers (generally, 2 watts or less in total); 

(vii) They usually have contril buttons situated in the front panel; 

(viii) They usually cannot be perated by a remote control; 

(ix) They may incorporate t It, swivel and height adjusting mechanisms, glare-free surfaces, 
flicker-free display, an other ergonomic design characteristics to facilitate prolonged 
periods of viewing at cl se proximity to the monitor; 

(x) They may utilize wirele s communication protocol to display data from an automatic data 
processing machine of h ading 84.71. 

XVI-8528-2 



• 85.28 

(B) MONITORS OTHER THAN THOSE CAPABLE OF DIRECTLY 
CONNECTING TO AND DESIGNED FOR USE WITH AN AUTOMATIC 

DATA PROCESSING MACHINE OF HEADING 84.71 

This group includes monitors which are capable of receiving signals when connected directly to 
the video camera or recorder by means of composite video, s-video or co-axial cables, so that all 
the radio-frequency circuits are eliminated. They are typically used by television companies or 
for closed-circuit television (airports, railway stations, factories, hospitals, etc.). They can, 
moreover, have separate inputs for red (R), green (G) and blue (B), or be coded in accordance 
with a particular standard (NTSC, SECAM, PAL, D-MAC, etc.). For reception of coded signals, 
the monitor must be equipped with a decoding device covering (the separation of) the R, G and 
B signals. They are not fitted with connectors characteristic of data processing systems, and they 
do not incorporate tilt, swivel and height adjusting mechanisms, glare-free surfaces, flicker-free 
display, and other ergonomic design characteristics to facilitate prolonged periods of viewing at 
close proximity to the monitor. They do not incorporate a channel selector or video tuner. 

• (C) PROJECTORS 

Projectors enable the image normally reproduced on the screen of a television receiver or of a 
monitor to be projected on an external surface. They may be based on CRT or flat panel (e.g., 
DMD, LCD, plasma) technology. 

(D) RECEPTION APPARATUS FOR TELEVISION 

This group includes apparatus whether or not designed to incorporate a video display or screen, 
such as : 

(1) Receivers of television broadcasts (terrestrial, cable or satellite) which do not include a 
display device (CRT, LCD, etc.). These apparatus receive signals and convert them into a 
signal suitable for display. They may also incorporate a modem for connection to the 
Internet. 

These receivers are intended to be used with video recording or reproducing apparatus, 
monitors, projectors or televisions. However, devices which simply isolate high-frequency 
television signals (sometimes called video tuners) are to be classified as parts in 
heading 85.29. 

(2) Television receivers for industrial use (e.g., for reading instruments at a distance, or for 
observation in dangerous localities). With this apparatus the transmission is often by line. 

(3) Television receivers of all kinds (LCD, plasma, CRT, etc.) used in the home (television 
sets), whether or not incorporating a radio-broadcast receiver, video cassette recorder, 
DVD player, DVD recorder, satellite receiver, etc. 

• 
XVI-8528-3 



   

  

85.28 • 
PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section ► VI), parts of the apparatus of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.29. 

The heading excludes, inter alia 

(a) Video recording or reproduci g apparatus (heading 85.21). 

(b) Special purpose vehicles (e. 1.1 , vans for broadcasting) permanently equipped with television receivers 
or other apparatus of this hea ing (generally heading 87.05). 

(c) Cinematographic projectors eading 90.07) and image projectors of heading 90.08. 

XVI-8528-4 



• 85.29 

85.29 - Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of headings 85.25 
to 85.28. 

8529.10 - Aerials and aerial reflectors of all kinds; parts suitable for use therewith 

8529.90 - Other 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), this heading covers parts of the apparatus of the four 
preceding headings. The range of parts classified here includes : 

(1) Aerials of all kinds and aerial reflectors, transmission and reception. 

(2) Rotor systems for radio-broadcast or television-broadcast receiving aerials consisting 
essentially of an electric motor mounted on the aerial mast to rotate it and a separate 
control box to aim and position the aerial. 

• (3) Cases and cabinets specialised to receive the apparatus of headings 85.25 to 85.28. 

(4) Aerial filters and separators. 

(5) Frames (chassis). 

* * 

This heading excludes : 

(a) Aerial masts (e.g., heading 73.08). 

(b) High-tension generators (heading 85.04). 

(c) Accumulators for cellular phones also referred to as mobile phones (heading 85.07). 

(d) Parts equally suitable for use principally with the goods of heading 85.17 and of headings 85.25 
to 85.28 (heading 85.17). 

(e) Earphones and headphones, whether or not combined with a microphone, for telephony or telegraphy 
as well as earphones and headphones which can be connected to radio or television receivers 
(heading 85.18). 

(f) Cathode-ray tubes and parts thereof (e.g., deflection coils) (heading 85.40). 

(g) Aerial amplifiers and radio-frequency oscillator units (heading 85.43). 

(h) Lenses and optical filters for television cameras (heading 90.02). 

(ij) Monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles (heading 96.20). 

• 
XVI-8529-1 



85.30 • 
85.30 - Electrical signalling, safety or traffic control equipment for railways, tramways, 

roads, inland waterw ys, parking facilities, port installations or airfields (other than 
those of heading 86.0 ). 

8530.10 - Equipment or railways or tramways 

8530.80 - Other equipment 

8530.90 - Parts 

This heading covers all elec rical equipment used for controlling the traffic on railways, 
hovertrain systems, roads or ' land waterways. To a certain extent similar equipment is also 
used for controlling ships or  bats (e.g., in harbours), aircraft (e.g., at airports) and for parking 
facilities, and this equipment 's also covered by the heading. But the heading excludes similar 
equipment which is operated echanically, even if incorporating minor electrical features (e.g., 
mechanical signals with elec cal means of illumination, or hydraulic or pneumatic controls set 
in motion electrically); this fal s in heading 86.08. 

Static signs, even if lit electricall (e.g., illuminated panels used as direction signs), are not regarded as 
traffic control equipment. They e therefore not covered by this heading but are classified in their own 
appropriate headings (headings 8 .10, 94.05, etc.). 

(A) Railway or tramway • 
equipment (including equipment for underground mine 

railways) and hovertrai transport system equipment. This falls in two groups : 

(1) Signalling or safety quipment. This consists of the actual signals (usually a number 
of coloured lights, or moving arms or discs, mounted on a post or in a framework of 
some sort), the actuat ng equipment and the control equipment (whether hand-operated 
or automatic). 

Signalling equipment of this kind is used for the control of traffic at stations, junctions, 
level crossings, etc., r for controlling the passage of a number of trains over the same 
sections of line. The latter type includes automatic section signalling equipment, the 
passage of a train fr i m one section of a track to the next automatically operating the 
necessary signals. 

The heading also co ers equipment for signalling to stations or to signal boxes (either 
by means of a warni g bell or a visual display) the position or approach of trains, or 
the position taken up y points, signals, etc. 

Certain types of sign lling equipment incorporate means of passing the signal direct to 
the cab of the engi e itself. Contacts or sensors mounted on the line actuate a 
mechanism on the e me as it passes, and either give visual or audible warning to the 
driver in the cab itsel or, in some cases, operate the controls of the engine to bring it to 
a stop. That part o the equipment mounted in the engine is not covered by this 
heading. 

(2) Track control equi ment, e.g., equipment for the remote control of points. This 
equipment consists sentially of the actual operating equipment (including in some 
cases locking device which is mounted on the track near each set of points, and the 
control panel and e ipment mounted at some centralised control point (signal box, 
etc.). 

This group includes ertain complex equipment for the automatic control of wagons in 
marshalling yards, e g., progression relay storage equipment and wagon movement 
control apparatus ("b 11 robot") installed in some big marshalling yards. 

XV1-8530-1 



85.30 

(B) Equipment for roads, inland waterways or parking facilities. This group includes : 

(1) Automatic level crossing signals, e.g., winking lights, bells, illuminated stop signs. 

Electrical equipment for operating gates or barriers is also covered by this heading. 

(2) Traffic lights. These usually consist of a system of coloured lights installed at 
cross-roads, junctions, etc. They comprise the actual light installations, control 
equipment and means of operating the controls. The lights may be hand-operated 
(lights operated by a traffic policeman or, on certain pedestrian crossings, by the 
pedestrian) or automatic (lights operated on a time basis, and lights operated by the 
passage of vehicles, either by means of photoelectric cells or by contacts placed on the 
road). 

(C) Electrical traffic control equipment for port installations or airfields. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

* 
* * 

The heading does not cover electrical lighting or signalling equipment for mounting on cycles or motor 
vehicles (heading 85.12). 

XVI-8530-2 



85.31 • 
85.31 - Electric sound or vis al signalling apparatus (for example, bells, sirens, indicator 

panels, burglar or fir alarms), other than those of heading 85.12 or 85.30. 

8531.10 - Burglar or ire alarms and similar apparatus 

8531.20 - Indicator p nels incorporating liquid crystal devices (LCD) or light-emitting 
diodes (LE 

8531.80 - Other appa atus 

8531.90 - Parts 

With the exception of signall ng apparatus used on cycles or motor vehicles (heading 85.12) 
and that for traffic control o roads, railways, etc. (heading 85.30), this heading covers all 
electrical apparatus used for gnalling purposes, whether using sound for the transmission of 
the signal (bells, buzzers, ho ters, etc.) or using visual indication (lamps, flaps, illuminated 
numbers, etc.), and whether o aerated by hand (e.g., door bells) or automatically (e.g., burglar 
alarms). 

Static signs, even if lit electrica ly (e.g., lamps, lanterns, illuminated panels, etc.) are not regarded as 
signalling apparatus. They are t erefore not covered by this heading but are classified in their own 
appropriate headings (headings 8 .10, 94.05, etc.). 

The heading includes, inter ali 

(A) Electric bells, buzzer , door chimes, etc. The bells consist essentially of an 
electro-magnetically ope ated appliance which causes a small hammer to vibrate and strike 
a bell dome. Buzzers are imilar but without the bell dome. Both are used very extensively 
for domestic purposes (•  .g., as door bells), and in offices, hotels, etc. The heading also 
covers electric door chi es in which one or more metal tubes are struck, emitting a 
musical note or series of musical notes, and electrically operated church bells, other than 
carillons suitable for play'ng music (Chapter 92). 

Electric bells and door himes are usually designed to be operated from a low tension 
supply (primary cell or b: ttery), but in certain cases they incorporate a transformer to step 
down the mains voltage. 

Electric sound signalli g apparatus, horns, sirens, etc. The sound is produced by a 
vibrating reed, by a rota ing disc set in motion electrically or electronic sound generator; 
they include factory sire s, air raid sirens, ships' sirens, etc. 

Other electrical signall ng a paratus (winking or intermittent lights, etc.) for aircraft, 
ships, trains or other veil' les other than for cycles or motor vehicles heading 85.12), but 
not radio or radar appara s of heading 85.26. 

Indicator panels and t e like. These are used (e.g., in offices, hotels and factories) for 
calling personnel, indic ting where a certain person or service is required, indicating 
whether a room is free or not. They include : 

(1) Room indicators. T ese are large panels with numbers corresponding to a number of 
rooms. When a butt • n is pressed in the room concerned the corresponding number is 
either lit up or expos d by the falling away of a shutter or flap. 

XVI-8531-1 



• 85.31 

(2) Number indicators. The signals appear as illuminated figures on the face of a small 
box; in some apparatus of this kind the calling mechanism is operated by the dial of a 
telephone. Also clock type indicators in which the numbers are indicated by a hand 
moving round a dial. 

(3) Office indicators, for example, those used to indicate whether the occupant of a 
particular office is free or not. Some types are merely a simple "come in" or "engaged" 
sign illuminated at will by the occupant of the office. 

(4) Lift indicators. These indicate, on an illuminated board, where the lift is and whether 
it is going up or down. 

(5) Engine room telegraph apparatus for ships. 

(6) Station indicating panels for showing the times and platforms of trains. 

(7) Indicators for race courses, football stadiums, bowling alleys, etc. 

• Certain of these indicator panels, etc., also incorporate bells or other sound signalling 
devices. 

The heading does not cover public maps of roads or railways in which a particular place, road, 
section or route is illuminated on pressing an appropriate button, nor electric advertising signs. 

(E) Burglar alarms. These consist of two parts : a detecting part, and a signalling part (bell, 
buzzer, visual indicator, etc.) which is set off automatically when the detecting part 
operates. Burglar alarms operate by various means, e.g. : 

(1) By electrical contacts which are operated by stepping on a certain part of the floor, 
opening a door, breaking or touching fine wires, etc. 

(2) By capacitance effects. These are used often in connection with safes; the safe acts as 
one plate of a capacitor whose capacitance is affected by the approach of any body, 
thus upsetting the electrical circuit and setting off the alarm. 

(3) Photoelectric devices. A ray (often of infra-red light) is focussed on a photoelectric 
cell; when the ray is interrupted, the change in current in the photoelectric cell circuit 
sets off the alarm. 

(F) Fire alarms. Automatic alarms also consist of two parts : a detecting part, and a signalling 
part (bell, buzzer, visual indicator, etc.). They include : 

(1) Apparatus operated by a fusible product (wax or special alloy) which melts when 
the temperature rises above a certain point, thus allowing electrical contacts to close 
and set off the alarm. 

XVI-8531-2 



85.31 • 
(2) Apparatus based o the expansion of a bi-metal strip, liquid or gas - expansion 

beyond a certain poi t operating the alarm. In one type, the expansion of a gas forces a 
piston to move in a c Linder; a valve is incorporated so that a slow expansion does not 
set off the alarm, but .Illy a sudden expansion due to a sudden rise in temperature. 

(3) Apparatus based n the variation in the electrical resistance of an element 
subjected to a change in temperature. 

(4) Apparatus based o photoelectric cells. A ray of light is focussed on the cell and, if 
obscured to a predet rmined extent by smoke, operates the alarm. Similar apparatus 
fitted with a graduate • indicator or a recording system fall in Chapter 90. 

In addition to the auto atic fire alarms, the heading also covers non-automatic alarms, 
such as are mounted in st eets, for calling the fire brigade. 

(G) Electric vapour or gas larms, consisting of a detector and a sound or visual alarm, to 
warn of the presence of h zardous gaseous mixtures (e.g., natural gas, methane). 

(H) Flame alarms (flame • etectors) incorporating a photoelectric cell which operates the 
alarm through a relay hen the flame lights or goes out. Detectors not incorporating 
electric sound or visual a arm devices are classified in heading 85.36. • 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Switches and switch-panels whether or not incorporating simple indicating lights (heading 85.36 
or 85.37). 

(b) Fire alarms incorporating s ke detectors containing a radioactive substance (heading 90.22). 

(c) LCD monitors or television ceivers (heading 85.28). 

• 
XVI-8531-3 



85.32 

85.32 - Electrical capacitors, fixed, variable or adjustable (pre-set) (+). 

8532.10 - Fixed capacitors designed for use in 50/60 Hz circuits and having a reactive 
power handling capacity of not less than 0.5 kvar (power capacitors) 

- Other fixed capacitors : 

8532.21 - - Tantalum 

8532.22 - - Aluminium electrolytic 

8532.23 - - Ceramic dielectric, single layer 

8532.24 - - Ceramic dielectric, multilayer 

8532.25 - - Dielectric of paper or plastics 

8532.29 - - Other 

8532.30 - Variable or adjustable (pre-set) capacitors 

8532.90 - Parts 

Electrical capacitors (or condensers) consist, in principle, of two conducting surfaces separated 
by an insulating material (dielectric), e.g., air, paper, mica, oil, resins, rubber and plastics, 
ceramics or glass. 

They are used for various purposes in many branches of the electrical industry (e.g., to improve 
the power factor of AC circuits, to produce phase-shifted currents for rotating fields in induction 
motors, to protect electrical contacts from the effects of arcing, for storing and releasing given 
quantities of electricity, in oscillating circuits, in frequency filters, and very widely in the radio, 
television or telephone industries or for industrial electronic equipment). 

Their characteristics (shape, size, capacitance, nature of dielectric, etc.) vary according to their 
intended use. The heading, however, covers all capacitors irrespective of their type and method 
of manufacture and whatever their intended use (including standard capacitors used in 
laboratories or in numerous measuring instruments, specially made within fine limits and 
designed to remain constant during use). 

The heading also covers capacitors grouped together on a chassis or in a container (e.g., certain 
large power factor capacitors and capacitor boxes consisting of a number of standard capacitors 
with means of connecting them together, in series or in parallel, to obtain any required 
capacitance). 

(A) FIXED CAPACITORS 

Fixed capacitors are those in which the capacitance cannot be varied. The main types are : dry 
capacitors, "oil" impregnated capacitors, "gas" impregnated capacitors, "oil" filled capacitors 
and electrolytic capacitors. 

(1) In dry capacitors the plates and dielectric are usually in the form of superimposed plates or 
rolled strip or foil. In certain dry capacitors a metal covering is applied by a chemical or 
thermic process to a fixed dielectric. Dry capacitors may be enclosed in a clamp-equipped 
box or be used without a box. 

XVI-8532-1 



85.32 • 
"Oil" impregnated capac tors are similar to dry capacitors but the dielectric, usually of 
plastic film or plastic fil and paper, is impregnated with oil or other liquid. 

"Gas" impregnated capac tors are capacitors consisting of two or more electrodes separated 
by a gas, other than air, w ich serves as a dielectric. 

In some cases the capacit r ("oil filled capacitor") is enclosed in a container filled with oil 
or other suitable liquid, nd many incorporate accessory devices such as pressure gauges 
and safety valves. 

In electrolytic capacitors, one of the plates is generally of aluminium or tantalum while the 
role of the other is fulfill 4 by a suitable electrolyte to which the current is led by means of 
an electrode, sometime similar in form to the aluminium or tantalum plate. The 
electrolytic action produc s on the aluminium or tantalum a thin layer of complex chemical 
compounds which therea er constitutes the dielectric. The capacitor is sometimes enclosed 
in a container, but gen ally the outer electrode itself constitutes the container; these 
capacitors are often fitte e with a pin base similar to that of a valve. Certain capacitors of 
this type containing a pas form of electrolyte are also called "dry electrolytic capacitors". 

( ) VARIABLE CAPACITORS • 
Variable capacitors are those i which the capacitance can be varied at will. In most cases air is 
the dielectnc, and the plates usually consist of two groups of metal plates, one group fixed while 
the other, mounted on an axis, can be turned so that its plates can pass between the fixed plates. 
The degree to which the mo ile plates (rotors) are turned and overlap with the fixed plates 
(stators) varies the capacitanc of the capacitor. 

(C) PRE- ET OR ADJUSTABLE CAPACITORS 

Pre-set or adjustable capaci ors (including trimming capacitors) are those in which the 
capacitance can be adjusted ithin narrow limits to a precise value. This adjustment can be 
made in different ways. In ce in types the distance between the plates may be varied by means 
of a screw. Other types consis of two metal cylinders, one of which can be moved to a variable 
extent within the other or of o mutually moved semicircles. Usually, the dielectrics used are, 
for example, mica, ceramics, lastics or air. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts of capacitors are also classified here. 

The heading does not cover cert in synchronous motors used for power factor improvement, even though 
they are often called "synchrono s capacitors" (heading 85.01). 

0 

0 0 

XVI-8532-2 



• 85.32 

Subheading Explanatory Notes. 

Subheading 8532.23 

This subheading covers single layer ceramic dielectric fixed capacitors, which are in the form of discs or 
tubes. 

Subheading 8532.24 

This subheading covers multilayered ceramic dielectric fixed capacitors, which have connecting leads or 
are in the form of chips. 

XVI-8532-3 



85.33 • 
85.33 - Electrical resistors ( ncluding rheostats and potentiometers), other than heating 

resistors. 

8533.10 - Fixed carbon resistors, composition or film types 

- Other fixesresistors : 

8533.21 - - For a po er handling capacity not exceeding 20 W 

8533.29 - - Other 

- Wirewoun variable resistors, including rheostats and potentiometers : 

8533.31 - - For a po er handling capacity not exceeding 20 W 

8533.39 - - Other 

8533.40 - Other variable resistors, including rheostats and potentiometers 

8533.90 - Parts 

(A) Resistors (resistances). These are conductors whose function is to provide a given 
electrical resistance in a ircuit (e.g., to limit the current flowing). They vary greatly in size 
and shape, and in the m terials of which they are made. They may be made of metals (in 
the form of bars, shapes r wire, often coiled in bobbins) or of carbon in the form of rods, 
or of carbon, silicon cart  ide, metal or metal oxide film. They may be obtained in the form 
of individual componen s by a printing process. Certain resistors may be fitted with a 
number of terminals alio' ving the whole or part to be included in the circuit. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Oil immersed resist rs. 

(2) Carbon resistance amps, in the form of an electric light bulb but with a special 
carbon filament; ho ever, carbon filament lamps for lighting purposes are excluded 
(heading 85.39). 

(3) Barretters consistin of iron filaments assembled in a glass tube filled with hydrogen 
or helium; these hav the property of varying automatically within certain limits and so 
keeping the current c nstant. 

(4) Standard resistors used for comparison and measuring purposes (e.g., in 
laboratories); also re istance boxes consisting of a number of such resistors assembled 
in a box with swi ching or terminal arrangements for connecting any required 
combinations of the sistors into the circuit. 

(5) Non-linear resistor : depending on temperature (thermistors) with a negative or 
positive temperature coefficient (usually mounted in glass tubes), and non-linear 
resistors depending n voltage (varistors/VDR), but not including varistor diodes of 
heading 85.41. 

(6) Resistors known as "strain gauges" being the sensitive elements of a strain 
measuring instrumen . 

XVI-8533-1 



85.33 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Heating resistors (heading 85.16 or 85.45). 

(b) Light dependent resistors (heading 85.41). 

(B) Rheostats. These are variable resistors with a sliding contact or other means enabling the 
value of resistance in the circuit to be varied at will. They include, slide wire rheostats with 
a cursor sliding over a resistance coil; step-by-step rheostats; hydro-rheostats with movable 
electrodes immersed in a liquid conductor; automatic rheostats (e.g., with minimum or 
maximum current or voltage operating mechanisms); and centrifugal rheostats. 

Certain rheostats are designed for particular purposes (e.g., theatre dimmers used in a 
lighting circuit to extinguish the lighting slowly; and motor starters and controllers 
consisting of a number of resistors with the necessary switching arrangement for switching 
in or out one or more resistors in the motor circuit). Nevertheless, they remain classified 
here. 

(C) Potentiometers. These consist of a fixed resistor between two contacts and a sliding 
tapping which can make contact on any point of the resistor. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the resistors of this heading are also classified here. 

XVI-8533-2 



85.34 • 
85.34 - Printed circuits. 

In accordance with Note 6 to this Chapter, this heading covers the circuits which are made by 
forming on an insulating bas , by any printing process (conventional printing or embossing, 
plating-up, etching, etc.), co ductor elements (wiring), contacts or other printed components 
such as inductances, resistors and capacitors ("passive" elements), other than elements which 
can produce, rectify, detect, odulate or amplify electric signals, such as diodes, triodes or other 
"active" elements. Some ba is or "blank" circuits may comprise only printed conductor 
elements generally consisting of thin uniform strips or wafers with, if appropriate, connectors or 
contact devices. Others com . ne several of the above elements according to a pre-established 
pattern. 

The insulating base material is generally flat but may also be in the shape of a cylinder, a 
truncated cone, etc. The circ it may be printed on one or both sides (double circuits). Several 
printed circuits may be assem led in multiple layers and interconnected (multiple circuits). 

The heading also covers thin- r thick-film circuits consisting solely of passive elements. 

Thin-film circuits are formed 'y the deposition on glass or ceramic plates of specific patterns of 
metallic and dielectric film, i y vacuum evaporation, cathode sputtering or chemical methods. 
The patterns may be formed 13, deposition through masks or by deposition of a continuous sheet 
with subsequent selective etc ing. • 
Thick-film circuits are forme by screen printing onto ceramic plates of similar patterns, using 
pastes (or inks) containing ixtures of powdered glass, ceramics and metals with suitable 
solvents. The plates are then mace-fired. 

Printed circuits may be pro ided with holes or fitted with non-printed connecting elements 
either for mounting mechani al elements or for the connection of electrical components not 
obtained during the printing p ocess. Film circuits are generally supplied in metallic, ceramic or 
plastic capsules which are fitt d with connecting leads or terminals. 

Individual passive components uch as inductances, capacitors and resistors obtained by any printing 
process are not regarded as prim ed circuits of this heading but are classifiable in their own appropriate 
headings (e.g., heading 85.04, 8 .16, 85.32 or 85.33). 

Circuits on which mechanical el ments or electrical components have been mounted or connected are not 
regarded as printed circuits wit in the meaning of this heading. They generally fall to be classified in 
accordance with Note 2 to Sectio XVI or Note 2 to Chapter 90, as the case may be. 

XVI-8534-1 



85.35 

85.35 Electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for making 
connections to or in electrical circuits (for example, switches, fuses, lightning 
arresters, voltage limiters, surge suppressors, plugs and other connectors, junction 
boxes), for a voltage exceeding 1,000 volts. 

8535.10 - Fuses 

- Automatic circuit breakers : 

8535.21 - - For a voltage of less than 72.5 kV 

8535.29 - - Other 

8535.30 - Isolating switches and make-and-break switches 

8535.40 - Lightning arresters, voltage limiters and surge suppressors 

8535.90 - Other 

This heading covers electrical apparatus generally used in power distribution systems. The 
provisions of Explanatory Note to heading 85.36 apply, mutatis mutandis, as regards the 
technical characteristics and the functioning of apparatus for switching or protecting electrical 
circuits, or for making connections to or in electrical circuits. The heading covers apparatus of 
the kinds described in Explanatory Note to heading 85.36, when for a voltage exceeding 
1,000 volts. 

These include : 

(A) Fuses and automatic circuit breakers which automatically interrupt the current when its 
intensity or voltage exceeds a certain limit. 

(B) Make-and-break switches specialised for high tension circuits. They are usually of a 
complex and robust construction having special devices to prevent arcing, and they may 
have multiple contacts or be remote controlled by different means (e.g., levers, 
servomotors). These switches are often mounted in containers of metal or insulating 
material, which have been filled with a fluid (e.g., oil) or a gas, or in which a vacuum has 
been created. 

(C) Lightning arresters. These are protective devices designed to protect high tension cables 
or electrical installations from the effects of lightning; they consist of a device normally 
insulating to the high tension line but which breaks down and becomes a conducting path 
to earth in the event of exceptionally high voltages which otherwise would damage the line 
or electrical installation. Among the many types are metal oxide arresters, carbon granule 
arresters, arresters consisting of a horned spark gap or guard shield mounted on an 
insulator or an insulator chain, electrolytic arresters, etc. However, lightning arresters 
based on the principle of radioactivity are classified in heading 90.22. 

(D) Voltage limiters. These are devices intended to ensure that the potential difference 
between two conductors or between the conductors and the earth does not exceed a 
predetermined value. These devices are sometimes constructed in the same manner as 
discharge lamps, but not being usable for lighting purposes, they cannot be considered as 
lamps. 

However, the heading does not cover automatic voltage regulators (heading 90.32). 

(E) Isolating switches are used for isolating sections of a line; they are of the slow break type, 
but unlike make-and-break switches they are not generally intended to be used when the 
circuit is loaded. 

XVI-8535-1 



85.35 • 
(F) Surge or spike suppre sors. These are assemblies of coils, capacitors, etc., inserted in 

series or in parallel wit a line or electrical apparatus to absorb high frequency surges. 
Simple coils or capacit s used on their own for this purpose remain classified in their 
respective headings. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the apparatus of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.38. 

* * 

The heading excludes assembli s (other than simple switch assemblies) of the apparatus mentioned 
above (heading 85.37). 

• 

XVI-8535-2 



85.36 

85.36 - Electrical apparatus for switching or protecting electrical circuits, or for making 
connections to or in electrical circuits (for example, switches, relays, fuses, surge 
suppressors, plugs, sockets, lamp-holders and other connectors, junction boxes), for 
a voltage not exceeding 1,000 volts; connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre 
bundles or cables. 

8536.10 - Fuses 

8536.20 Automatic circuit breakers 

8536.30 - Other apparatus for protecting electrical circuits 

- Relays : 

8536.41 - - For a voltage not exceeding 60 V 

8536.49 - - Other 

8536.50 - Other switches 

- Lamp-holders, plugs and sockets : 

8536.61 - - Lamp-holders 

8536.69 - - Other 

8536.70 - Connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables 

8536.90 - Other apparatus 

This heading covers electrical apparatus for a voltage not exceeding 1,000 volts generally used 
for dwellings or industrial equipment. However, heading 85.35 covers the apparatus described 
below for a voltage exceeding 1,000 volts. This heading also covers connectors for optical 
fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables. 

The heading includes : 

(I) APPARATUS FOR SWITCHING ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS 

These apparatus consist essentially of devices for making or breaking one or more circuits in 
which they are connected, or for switching from one circuit to another; they may be known as 
single pole, double pole, triple pole, etc., according to the number of switch circuits 
incorporated. This group also includes change-over switches and relays. 

(A) The switches of this heading include small switches for use in radio apparatus, electrical 
instruments, etc., switches of a kind used in domestic electrical wiring (e.g., tumbler 
switches, lever operated switches, rotary switches, pendant switches, push button switches) 
and switches for industrial application (such as, limit switches, cam switches, 
microswitches and proximity switches). 

Switches operated by the opening or closing of a door and automatic thermo-electric 
switches (starters) for starting fluorescent lamps are classified here. 

XVI-8536-1 



85.36 • 
Other examples classifi d here include electronic AC switches consisting of optically 
coupled input and outp t circuits (insulated thyristor AC switches); electronic switches, 
including temperature tected electronic switches, consisting of a transistor and a logic 
chip (chip-on-chip tec ology) for a voltage not exceeding 1,000 volts; and electro-
mechanical snap-action itches for a current not exceeding 11 amps (toggle switch). 

Electronic switches whi operate by contactless means, using semiconductor components 
(e.g., for transistors, thy stors, integrated circuits). 

Door locks which themselv s incorporate a switch are excluded (heading 83.01). 

(B) Change-over switches e used to connect one or more lines to one or more other lines. 

In the simplest type one line is connected to a central point which, by means of a moving 
arm, can be connected t any one of the other lines. More complicated apparatus of this 
type includes starting s itches for electric motors, and control gear for electric vehicles. 
These often include no only the switching gear, but also a number of resistors to be 
switched in or out of the ircuit as required (see Explanatory Note to heading 85.33). 

The heading also covers omplicated switching-units used in radio or television sets, etc. 

(C) Relays are electrical dev ces by means of which the circuit is automatically controlled by a 
change in the same or a other circuit. They are used, for example, in telecommunication 
apparatus, road or rail si nalling apparatus, for the control or protection of machine-tools, 
etc. 

The various types can be distinguished by, for example : 

(1) The electrical mea s of control used : electromagnetic relays, permanent magnet 
relays, thermo-elect is relays, induction relays, electro-static relays, photoelectric 
relays, electronic rel. ys, etc. 

(2) The predetermine conditions on which they operate : maximum current relays, 
maximum or minim m voltage relays, differential relays, fast acting cut-out relays, 
time delay relays, et . 

Contactors, which are lso considered as relays, are devices for making and breaking 
electrical circuits, whic automatically reset without a mechanical locking device or hand 
operation. They are ge erally operated and maintained in an active state by an electric 
current. 

XVI-8536-2 



• 85.36 

(II) APPARATUS FOR PROTECTING ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS 

The heading includes fuses. These normally consist of a device in which a length of fuse wire is 
incorporated (or can be incorporated) so that, when they are inserted in the circuit, the fuse wire 
will melt and so break the circuit if the current increases dangerously. They vary considerably in 
design according to the type of circuit and current for which they are intended. Cartridge fuses 
consist of a tube containing the fuse wire in contact with metal caps at the ends; other fuses 
consist of a base or socket (for incorporation in the line), and a connecting piece (which may be 
screwed into the socket or pushed in between spring contacts) on which the fuse wire is 
mounted. The heading covers the complete fuse, with or without wire. Sockets and connecting 
pieces presented separately are also classified here except those wholly of insulating material 
(apart from any minor components of metal incorporated during moulding solely for purposes 
of assembly) (heading 85.47). Fuse wire is classified according to its constituent material, but 
short lengths of fuse wire with loops or other means of connection so as to be ready for use 
remain in this heading. 

The heading includes other devices for preventing overload of circuits (e.g., electro-magnetic 
devices which automatically break the circuit when the current exceeds a certain value). 

The heading also excludes constant voltage transformers (heading 85.04) and automatic voltage 
regulators (heading 90.32). 

• 

(III) APPARATUS FOR MAKING CONNECTIONS TO OR IN 
ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS 

This apparatus is used to connect together the various parts of an electrical circuit. It includes : 

(A) Plugs, sockets and other contacts for connecting a movable lead or apparatus to an 
installation which is usually fixed. This category includes : 

(1) Plugs and sockets (including those for connecting two movable leads). A plug may 
have one or more pins or side contacts which match corresponding holes or contacts in 
the socket. The rim or one of the pins may be used for earthing purposes. 

(2) Sliding contacts such as brushes for motors and current-collectors for electric traction 
vehicles, lifting appliances, etc. (overhead or third rail collectors, etc.) other than such 
articles of "carbon" or graphite (heading 85.45). They may consist of block metal, 
wire cloth or laminated strip, and remain in this heading even when coated with an 
external lubricating layer of graphite. 

(3) Lamp or valve sockets and lamp-holders. Certain lamp-holders are in the form of 
candles for mounting in candelabra or are designed to form a bracket against a wall; 
these remain classified here provided their main function is to act as lamp-holders. 

Plugs and sockets, etc., assembled with a length of wire are excluded (heading 85.44). 

(B) Other connectors, terminals, terminal strips, etc. These include small squares of 
insulating material fitted with electrical connectors (dominoes), terminals which are metal 
parts intended for the reception of conductors, and small metal parts designed to be fitted 
on the end of electrical wiring to facilitate electrical connection (spade terminals, crocodile 
clips, etc.). 

Terminal strips consist of strips of insulating material fitted with a number of metal 
terminals or connectors to which electrical wiring can be fixed. The heading also covers 
tag strips orpanels; these consist of a number of metal tags set in insulating material so 
that electrical wires can be soldered to them. Tag strips are used in radio or other electrical 
apparatus. 

XVI-8536-3 



85.36 • 
(C) Junction boxes. These c III sist of boxes fitted internally with terminals or other devices for 

connecting together elec cal wires. Boxes not fitted with means of electrical connection 
or provisions therefor, • I e excluded and are classified according to their constituent 
material. 

(IV) CONNECTORS FO OPTICAL FIBRES, OPTICAL FIBRE BUNDLES OR 
CABLES 

For the purpose of heading 85. 6, "connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables" 
means connectors that simpl mechanically align optical fibres end to end in a digital line 
system. They perform no othe function, such as the amplification, regeneration or modification 
of a signal. Connectors for o *cal fibres, without cables, remain classified in this heading but 
those connectors for optical i. es with cables are excluded (heading 85.44 or 90.01). 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the apparatus of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.38. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Non-linear voltage resistors ( aristorsNDR) used as voltage controllers (heading 85.33). 

(b) Assemblies (other than simpl switch assemblies) of the apparatus mentioned above (heading 85.37). 

(c) Semiconductor diodes used voltage controllers (heading 85.41). 

XVI-8536-4 



• 85.37 

85.37 - Boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases, equipped with two or more 
apparatus of heading 85.35 or 85.36, for electric control or the distribution of 
electricity, including those incorporating instruments or apparatus of Chapter 90, and 
numerical control apparatus, other than switching apparatus of heading 85.17. 

8537.10 - For a voltage not exceeding 1,000 V 

8537.20 - For a voltage exceeding 1,000 V 

These consist of an assembly of apparatus of the kind referred to in the two preceding headings 
(e.g., switches and fuses) on a board, panel, console, etc., or mounted in a cabinet, desk, etc. 
They usually also incorporate meters, and sometimes also subsidiary apparatus such as 
transformers, valves, voltage regulators, rheostats or luminous circuit diagrams. 

The goods of this heading vary from small switchboards with only a few switches, fuses, etc. 
(e.g., for lighting installations) to complex control panels for machine-tools, rolling mills, power 
stations, radio stations, etc., including assemblies of several of the articles cited in the text of 

• this heading. 

The heading also covers : 

(1) Numerical control panels with built-in automatic data processing machine, which are 
generally used to control machine-tools. 

(2) Programmed switchboards to control apparatus; these permit variations in the choice of 
operations to be followed. They are normally used in domestic electrical appliances, such 
as washing machines and dish washers. 

(3) "Programmable controllers" which are digital apparatus using a programmable memory for 
the storage of instructions for implementing specific functions such as logic, sequencing, 
timing, counting and arithmetic, to control, through digital or analog input/output modules, 
various types of machines. 

The heading does not cover automatic controlling apparatus of heading 90.32. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are classified in 
heading 85.38. 

XVI-8537-1 



85.37 • 
The heading excludes : 

(a) Telephone switchboards (he ding 85.17). 

(b) Simple switch assemblies, s h as those consisting of two switches and a connector (heading 85.35 
or 85.36). 

(c) Cordless infrared devices fir the remote control of television receivers, video recorders or other 
electrical equipment (headin 85.43). 

(d) Time switches with clock or atch movement or with synchronous motor (heading 91.07). 

• 

XVI-8537-2 



• 85.38 

85.38 - Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of heading 85.35, 85.36 
or 85.37. 

8538.10 - Boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases for the goods of 
heading 85.37, not equipped with their apparatus 

8538.90 - Other 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), this heading covers parts of the goods of the three preceding 
headings. 

The heading includes, for example, boards for switchboards, generally of plastics or metal, 
without their instruments, provided they are clearly recognisable as parts of switchboards. 

XVI-8538-1 



85.39 • 
85.39 - Electric filament or *scharge lamps, including sealed beam lamp units and ultra-

violet or infra-red la ps; arc-lamps; light-emitting diode (LED) lamps. 

8539.10 - Sealed bea lamp units 

- Other filam nt lamps, excluding ultra-violet or infra-red lamps : 

8539.21 - - Tungsten alogen 

8539.22 - - Other, of power not exceeding 200 W and for a voltage exceeding 100 V 

8539.29 - - Other 

- Discharge 1 mps, other than ultra-violet lamps : 

8539.31 - - Fluoresce t, hot cathode 

8539.32 - - Mercury r sodium vapour lamps; metal halide lamps 

8539.39 - - Other 

- Ultra-violet or infra-red lamps; arc-lamps : 

8539.41 - - Arc-lamp 

8539.49 - - Other 

8539.50 - Light-emitt ng diode (LED) lamps 

8539.90 - Parts 

Electric light lamps consist o Wass or quartz containers, of various shapes, containing the 
necessary elements for cony ming electrical energy into light rays (including infra-red or 
ultra-violet rays). 

The heading covers all electric light lamps, whether or not specially designed for particular uses 
(including flashlight discharge amps). 

The heading covers filament la ps, gas or vapour discharge lamps, arc-lamps and light-emitting 
diode (LED) lamps. 

(A) SEALED BEAM LAMP UNITS 

Sealed beam lamp units are sometimes designed for incorporation in the bodywork of cars; 
they consist of a lens and re ector and a filament sealed within a gas-filled or vacuum-type 
lamp. 

XVI-8539-1 



• 85.39 

(B) OTHER FILAMENT LAMPS, EXCLUDING ULTRA-VIOLET 
OR INFRA-RED LAMPS (see Part (D)) 

The light is produced by a filament (metal or carbon) which is heated to incandescence by the 
passage of an electric current, the glass envelope (sometimes coloured) being either evacuated 
or filled with an inert gas under low pressure; in the base, which may be of the screw or bayonet 
type for fixing in the lamp-holder, are the necessary electrical contacts. 

These lamps are of various shapes, e.g., spherical (with or without a neck); pear or onion 
shaped; flame shaped; tubular (straight or curved); special fancy shapes for illuminations, 
decorations, Christmas trees, etc. 

This group also covers halogen lamps. 

(C) DISCHARGE LAMPS, OTHER THAN ULTRA-VIOLET LAMPS 
(see Part (D)) 

• These consist of a glass envelope (usually tubular) or a quartz envelope (usually in an outer 
envelope of glass), furnished with electrodes and containing, under low pressure, either a gas 
which becomes luminous under the influence of an electric discharge or a substance which gives 
off a vapour having similar properties; certain lamps may contain both a gas and a vapour 
producing substance. Some lamps have valves for the removal of compounds resulting from the 
action of the gas on the electrodes; others may be vacuumjacketed or water cooled. In some 
cases the internal wall of the lamps is coated with special substances which transform the ultra-
violet rays into visible light thus increasing the efficiency of the lamp (fluorescent lamps). Some 
lamps operate on high voltages, others on low. 

The principal lamps of this kind include : 

(1) Gas discharge tubes containing gases such as neon, helium, argon, nitrogen or carbon 
dioxide, including flashing discharge lamps used for photography or stroboscopic 
examination. 

(2) Sodium vapour lamps. 

(3) Mercury vapour lamps. 

(4) Gas filled dual lamps, in which the light is produced both by an incandescent filament and 
a gas discharge. 

(5) Metal halide lamps. 

(6) Xenon and alphanumeric tubes. 

(7) Spectral discharge and glow discharge lamps. 

These lamps are used for many purposes, e.g., domestic lighting; street lighting; office, factory, 
shop, etc., lighting; lighting of machines; and lighting for decorative or publicity purposes. The 
heading includes simple straight or curved tubes, and tubes in various complex forms (e.g., 
scrolls, letters, figures and stars). 

XVI-8539-2 



85.39 • 
(D) ULT ' -VIOLET AND INFRA-RED LAMPS 

Ultra-violet lamps are used f r medical, laboratory, germicidal or other purposes. They usually 
consist of a fused quartz tub containing mercury; they are sometimes enclosed in an outer 
envelope of glass. Some ar known as black light lamps (e.g., those used for theatrical 
purposes). 

Infra-red lamps are filament amps specially designed to produce infra-red rays. In many cases 
the interior of the lamp is cop sered or silvered to form a reflector. They are used, for example, 
for medical purposes or as a s urce of heat in industry. 

(E) ARC-LAMPS 

In lamps of this kind the light s emitted by an arc, or by an arc and by the incandescence of one 
or both of the electrodes betw en which the arc is maintained. These electrodes are generally of 
carbon or tungsten. Some lam s have an automatic device to bring the electrodes close together 
in order to strike the arc, and bsequently to maintain them at the correct distance apart in spite 
of the progressive using up o electrodes. Lamps designed for AC working have supplementary 
electrodes for starting purpos s. In open arc-lamps the arc burns in free air; in others it is in a 
glass envelope with suitable b ffles communicating with the free air. 

It should be noted that arc-la ps are complex apparatus, and are not merely simple lighting 
elements as is the case of the other goods of this heading. 

(F) LIG T-EMITTING DIODE (LED) LAMPS 

The light from these lamps i produced by one or more light-emitting diodes (LED). These 
lamps consist of a glass or pl stic envelope, one or more light-emitting diodes (LED), circuitry 
to rectify AC power and to c invert voltage to a level useable by the LEDs, and a base (e.g., 
screw, bayonet or bi-pin type for fixing in the lamp-holder. Certain lamps may also contain a 
heat sink. 

These lamps are of various ha es, e.g., spherical (with or without a neck); pear or onion 
shaped; flame shaped; tubul. (straight or curved); special fancy shapes for illuminations, 
decorations, Christmas trees, e c. 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 
They include : 

(1) Bases for incandescent a • discharge electric lamps and bulbs. 

(2) Metal electrodes for disc arge lamps and tubes. 

XVI-8539-3 



• 85.39 

The heading excludes : 

Glass envelopes, and glass parts having the essential character thereof (e.g., spotlight bulb reflectors) 
for lamps (heading 70.11). 

Resistance lamps with carbon filaments and variable lamps with iron filaments in hydrogen 
(heading 85.33). 

Automatic thermo-electric switches (starters) for starting fluorescent lamps (heading 85.36). 

Thermionic valves and tubes (heading 85.40). 

Light-emitting diodes (LED) of heading 85.41. 

Electro-luminescent devices, generally in strips, plates or panels, and based on electro-luminescent 
substances (e.g., zinc sulphide) placed between two layers of conductive material (heading 85.43). 

Arc-lamp carbons and carbon filaments (heading 85.45). 

XVI-8539-4 



85.40 • 
85.40 - Thermionic, cold cat ode or photo-cathode valves and tubes (for example, vacuum 

or vapour or gas fil d valves and tubes, mercury arc rectifying valves and tubes, 
cathode-ray tubes, to evision camera tubes). 

- Cathode-r y television picture tubes, including video monitor cathode-ray 
tubes : 

8540.11 - - Colour 

8540.12 - - Monochr me 

8540.20 - Television camera tubes; image converters and intensifiers; other 
photo-cath de tubes 

8540.40 - Data/grap is display tubes, monochrome; data/graphic display tubes, colour, 
with a pho phor dot screen pitch smaller than 0.4 mm 

8540.60 - Other cath de-ray tubes 

- Microwav tubes (for example, magnetrons, klystrons, travelling wave 
tubes, carc notrons), excluding grid-controlled tubes : 

8540.71 - - Magnetr i ns 

8540.79 - - Other 

- Other valv s and tubes : 

8540.81 - - Receiver or amplifier valves and tubes 

8540.89 - - Other 

- Parts : 

8540.91 - - Of catho e-ray tubes 

8540.99 - - Other  

This heading covers only tho•e valves and tubes which, for different purposes, utilise the effect 
of electrons emitted from a ca ode either in a vacuum or in gas. 

There are three types : thermi nic valves and tubes, in which the cathode must be heated before 
the electrons are emitted; col • cathode valves and tubes; and photo-cathode valves and tubes, in 
which the cathode is excited y the action of light. According to the number of their electrodes 
they are termed diodes, trio • es, tetrodes, etc. The same envelope may contain two or more 
systems with different functi ns (compound valves). The envelopes are of glass, ceramic or 
metal or of combinations of t ese materials and may incorporate means of cooling (cooling fins, 
water circulation system, etc.) 

XVI-8540-1 



• 85.40 

There are many kinds of valves and tubes, some of which are designed for special purposes such 
as microwave tubes (e.g., magnetrons, travelling wave tubes, carcinotrons, klystrons), 
disc-sealed (lighthouse) tubes, stabilising valves, thyratrons, ignitrons, etc. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Rectifying tubes and valves. These are designed for rectifying AC into DC. They may be 
vacuum type, gas-filled or filled with vapour (e.g., mercury vapour), and in general have 
two electrodes. Certain types (e.g., thyratrons) have control grids so that their operation 
can be regulated and even reversed (thus converting DC into AC). 

(2) Cathode-ray tubes. 

(a) Television camera tubes (image pick-up tubes, e.g., image orthicons or vidicons). 
These are electron-beam tubes for the conversion of an optical image into a 
corresponding electrical signal, usually by a scanning process. 

(b) Image converter tubes. These are vacuum tubes in which an image (usually of infra-red 
radiation) is projected on to a photoemissive surface which in turn produces a 
corresponding visible image on a luminescent surface. 

(c) Image intensifier tubes. These are electronic tubes in which an image projected on to a 
photoemissive surface produces a corresponding intensified image on a luminescent 
surface. 

(d) Other cathode-ray tubes in which electrical signals are converted, directly or indirectly, 
into visible images. An example of this type is the storage tube. In television receiver 
or video monitor tubes, the electrons from the cathode(s), after being focussed, 
deflected, etc., fall in the form of a beam on a part of the inner wall (usually the end of 
the tube) covered with fluorescent material, which constitutes a screen showing the 
picture the viewer sees. 

Cathode-ray tubes are also used in radar, in oscilloscopes and in certain automatic data 
processing system terminals (display tubes). 

(3) Photoemissive tubes, vacuum or gas-filled (also known as photoemissive cells). These 
consist of a glass or quartz tube containing two electrodes, of which the cathode is coated 
with a layer of photosensitive material (usually alkaline metal); under the action of the 
light, this layer emits electrons which establish conductibility between the electrodes and 
are collected on the anode. 

Photomultipliers are photosensitive vacuum tubes comprising a photoemissive cathode 
and an electron multiplier. 

(4) Other valves and tubes. These are usually vacuum type, and some have several 
electrodes. They are used for producing high frequency oscillations, as amplifiers, as 
detectors, as scan converters (without the use of a photocathode), etc. 

XVI-8540-2 



85.40 • 
PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section VI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here, for 
example, electrodes (cathod- s, grids, anodes), envelopes (of materials other than glass) for 
tubes, anti-implosion casing for cathode-ray tubes, deflection coils for mounting around the 
necks of cathode-ray tubes o scanning purposes. 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Glass face-plates and cones f envelopes for cathode-ray tubes (heading 70.11). 

(b) Metal tank mercury arc rect fiers (heading 85.04). 

(c) X-ray tubes (heading 90.22 

• 

XVI-8540-3 



• 85.41 

85.41 - Diodes, transistors and similar semiconductor devices; photosensitive semiconductor 
devices, including photovoltaic cells whether or not assembled in modules or made 
up into panels; light-emitting diodes (LED); mounted piezo-electric crystals (+). 

8541.10 - Diodes, other than photosensitive or light-emitting diodes (LED) 

- Transistors, other than photosensitive transistors : 

8541.21 - - With a dissipation rate of less than 1 W 

8541.29 - - Other 

8541.30 - Thyristors, diacs and triacs, other than photosensitive devices 

8541.40 - Photosensitive semiconductor devices, including photovoltaic cells whether 
or not assembled in modules or made up into panels; light-emitting 
diodes (LED) 

8541.50 - Other semiconductor devices 

8541.60 - Mounted piezo-electric crystals 

8541.90 - Parts 

(A) DIODES, TRANSISTORS AND SIMILAR SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES 

These are defined in Note 9 (a) to this Chapter. 

The operation of the devices of this group is based on the electronic properties of certain 
"semiconductor" materials. 

The main characteristics of these materials is that at room temperature their resistivity lies in the 
range between that of conductors (metals) and that of insulators. They consist, for instance, of 
certain ores (e.g., crystal galena), tetravalent chemical elements (germanium, silicon, etc.) or 
combinations of chemical elements (e.g., trivalent and pentavalent elements, such as gallium 
arsenide, indium antimonide). 

Semiconductor materials consisting of a tetravalent chemical element are generally 
monocrystalline. They are not used in their pure state but after very light doping (in a proportion 
expressed in parts per million) with a specific "impurity" (dopant). 

For a tetravalent element, the "impurity" may be a pentavalent chemical element (phosphorus, 
arsenic, antimony, etc.) or a trivalent element (boron, aluminium, gallium, indium, etc.). The 
former produce n-type semiconductors with excess electrons (negatively charged); the latter 
produce p-type semiconductors with electron deficiency, that is to say that holes (positively 
charged) predominate. 

Semiconductor materials combining tri- and pentavalent chemical elements are also doped. 

In the semiconductor materials consisting of ores, the impurities contained naturally in the ore 
act as dopants. 

The semiconductor devices of this group generally comprise one or more "junctions", between 
p-type and n-type semiconductor materials. 

XVI-8541-1 



85.41 • 
They include : 

(I) Diodes which are two-t rminal devices with a single p n junction; they allow current to 
pass in one direction (fo ard) but offer a very high resistance in the other (reverse). They 
are used for detection, r tification, switching, etc. 

The main types of dio es are signal diodes, power rectifier diodes, voltage regulator 
diodes, voltage referenc diodes. 

(II) Transistors are three- or four-terminal devices capable of amplification, oscillation, 
frequency conversion, r switching of electrical currents. The operation of a transistor 
depends on the variation in resistivity between two of the terminals upon the application of 
an electric field to the t ird terminal. The applied control signal or field is weaker than the 
resulting action brought bout by the change in resistance and thus amplification results. 

Transistors include : 

(1) Bipolar transistors, hich are three-terminal devices consisting of two diode type 
junctions, and whos transistor action depends on both positive and negative charge 
carriers (hence, bipo ar). 

(2) Field effect transisto s (also known as metal oxide semiconductors (MOS)), which may 
or may not have junction, but which depend on the induced depletion (or 
enhancement) of av liable charge carriers between two of the terminals. The transistor 
action in a field e ect transistor employs only one type of charge carrier (hence, 
unipolar). A parasif body diode, which is produced in a MOS type transistor (also 
known as MOSFE ), may operate as a freewheeling diode during inductive load 
switching. MOSFE which have four terminals are known as tetrodes. 

(3)  Insulated Gate Bipo r Transistors (IGBT), which are three-terminal devices consisting 
of a gate terminal and two load terminals (emitter and collector). By applying 
appropriate voltages across the gate and emitter terminals, current in one direction can 
be controlled, i.e. rned on and turned off. IGBT chips may be incorporated with 
diodes in a single p ckage (packaged IGBT devices), which protect the IGBT device 
and allow it to conti ue to function as a transistor. 

(III) Similar semiconductor devices. The "similar" devices referred to here are semiconductor 
devices whose operation depends on variations in resistivity on the application of an electric 
field. 

They include : 

(1) Thyristors, consisti i g of four conductivity regions in semiconducting materials (three 
or more p n juncti ►ns) through which a direct current passes in a predetermined 
direction when a c i ntrol pulse initiates conductivity. They are used as controlled 
rectifiers, as switche or as amplifiers and function as two interlocking, complementary 
transistors with a co i mon collector/base junction. 

(2) Triacs (bi-direction 1 triode thyristors), consisting of five conductivity regions in 
semiconducting ma I - rials (four p n junctions) through which an alternating current 
passes when a contr 1 pulse initiates conductivity. 

(3) Diacs, consisting o three conductivity regions in semiconducting materials (two p n 
junctions) and used provide the pulses required to operate a triac. 

(4) Varactors (or varia le capacitance diodes). 

XVI-8541-2 



• 85.41 

(5) Field effect devices, such as gridistors. 

(6) Gunn effect devices. 

However, this group does not include semiconductor devices which differ from those described above in 
that their operation depends primarily on temperature, pressure, etc., such as non-linear semiconductor 
resistors (thermistors, varistors, magneto-resistors, etc.) (heading 85.33). 

For photosensitive devices the operation of which depends on light rays (photodiodes, etc.), see 
group (B). 

The devices described above fall in this heading whether presented mounted, that is to say with 
their terminals or leads or packaged (components), unmounted (elements) or even in the form of 
undiced discs (wafers). However, natural semiconductor materials (e.g., galena) are classified in 
this heading only when mounted. 

The heading also excludes chemical elements of Chapter 28 (for example, silicon and selenium) doped 
for use in electronics, in the form of discs, wafers, or similar forms, polished or not, whether or not coated 
with a uniform epitaxial layer, provided they have not been selectively doped or diffused to create 
discrete regions. 

• (B) PHOTOSENSITIVE SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES 

This group comprises photosensitive semiconductor devices in which the action of visible rays, 
infra-red rays or ultra-violet rays causes variations in resistivity or generates an electromotive 
force, by the internal photoelectric effect. 

Photoemissive tubes (photoemissive cells) the operation of which is based on the external photoelectric 
effect (photoemission), belong to heading 85.40. 

The main types of photosensitive semiconductor devices are : 

(1) Photoconductive cells (light dependent resistors), usually consisting of two electrodes 
between which is a semiconductor substance (cadmium sulphide, lead sulphide, etc.) 
whose electrical resistance varies with the intensity of illumination falling on the cell. 

These cells are used in flame detectors, in exposure meters for automatic cameras, for 
counting moving objects, for automatic precision measuring devices, in automatic door 
opening systems, etc. 

(2) Photovoltaic cells, which convert light directly into electrical energy without the need for 
an external source of current. Photovoltaic cells based on selenium are used mainly in 
luxmeters and exposure meters. Those based on silicon have a higher output and are used, 
in particular, in control and regulating equipment, for detecting light impulses, in 
communication systems using fibre optics, etc. 

Special categories of photovoltaic cells are : 

(i) Solar cells, silicon photovoltaic cells which convert sunlight directly into electric 
energy. They are usually used in groups as sources of electric power, e.g., in rockets or 
satellites employed in space research, for mountain rescue transmitters. 

The heading also covers solar cells, whether or not assembled in modules or made up 
into panels. However the heading does not cover panels or modules equipped with 
elements, however simple, (for example, diodes to control the direction of the current), 
which supply the power directly to, for example, a motor, an electrolyser 
(heading 85.01). 

XVI-8541-3 



85.41 • 
(ii) Photodiodes (germa ium, silicon, etc.), characterised by a variation in resistivity when 

light rays strike their p n junction. They are used in automatic data processing (reading 
of data storage), as .hotocathodes in certain electronic tubes, in radiation pyrometers, 
etc. Phototransistors and photothyristors belong to this category of photoelectric 
receivers. 

The devices of this ategory differ, when packaged, from the diodes, transistors and 
thyristors of Part (A) above by their housing, which is partly transparent to permit the 
passage of light. 

(iii) Photocouples and p otorelays consisting of electroluminescent diodes combined with 
photodiodes, phototr sII istors or photothyristors. 

Photosensitive semiconductor devices fall in this heading whether presented mounted (i.e., with 
their terminals or leads), pack ged or unmounted. 

(C) IGHT-EMITTING DIODES (LED) 

Light-emitting diodes (LED , or electroluminescent diodes, (based, inter alia, on gallium 
arsenide or gallium phosphid ) are devices which convert electric energy into visible, infra-red 
or ultra-violet rays. They are ed, e.g., for displaying or transmitting data in control systems. • 
Laser diodes emit a coheren light beam and are used, e.g., in detecting nuclear particles, in 
altimetering or in telemetering equipment, in communication systems using fibre optics. 

(D) MOU TED PIEZO-ELECTRIC CRYSTALS 

These are mainly barium ti anate (including polycrystalline polarised elements of barium 
titanate), lead titanate zircon to or other crystals of heading 38.24 (see the corresponding 
Explanatory Note), or qua z or tourmaline crystals. They are used in microphones, 
loudspeakers, ultrasonic app ratus, stabilised frequency oscillating circuits, etc. They are 
classified here only if mounte . They are generally in the form of plates, bars, discs, rings, etc., 
and must, at least, be equippe I with electrodes or electric connections. They may be coated with 
graphite, varnish, etc., or arra ged on supports and they are often inside an envelope (e.g., metal 
box, glass bulb). If, however, ecause of the addition of other components, the complete article 
(mounting plus crystal) can n longer be regarded as merely a mounted crystal but has become 
identifiable as a specific part f a machine or appliance, the assembly is classified as a part of 
the machine or appliance in q estion : e.g., piezo-electric cells for microphones or loudspeakers 
(heading 85.18), sound-head (heading 85.22), pick-up elements (feelers) for ultrasonic 
thickness measuring or detecti g instruments (generally classified in accordance with Note 2 (b) 
to Chapter 90 or in heading 9 .33, as the case may be), quartz oscillators for electronic watches 
(heading 91.14). 

This heading also excludes unmo nted piezo-electric crystals (generally heading 38.24, 71.03 or 71.04). 

XVI-8541-4 



• 85.41 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are classified here. 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 8541.21 

The dissipation rate of a transistor is measured by applying the specified operating voltage to the device 
and measuring the continuous power handling capability using a case temperature limit of 25 °C. For 
example, if a transistor is capable of handling a 0.2 ampere load continuously at a specified operating 
voltage of five volts while maintaining a case temperature of 25 °C, its dissipation rate is 1 watt 
(Amperage x Voltage = Wattage). 

For transistors with a means of heat dissipation (for example, a tab, a metal case), the reference 

• temperature of 25 °C is that of the bottom or of the case, whereas for other transistors (for example, with 
simple casing of plastics), the room temperature applies. 

• 

• 
XVI-8541-5 



   

 

   

85.42 • 
85.42 - Electronic integrate s circuits. 

- Electronic integrated circuits : 

8542.31 - - Processo s and controllers, whether or not combined with memories, 
converte s, logic circuits, amplifiers, clock and timing circuits, or other 
circuits 

8542.32 - - Memori ;O. 

8542.33 - - Amplifie s 

8542.39 - - Other 

8542.90 - Parts 

The articles of this heading ar defined in Note 9 (b) to the Chapter. 

Electronic integrated circuit are devices having a high passive and active element or 
component density, which ar regarded as single units (see Explanatory Note to heading 85.34, 
first paragraph concerning el ments or components to be regarded as "passive" or "active"). 
However, electronic circuits c ntaining only passive elements are excluded from this heading. • 
Unlike electronic integrated ircuits, discrete components may have a single active electrical 
function (semiconductor de ces defined by Note 9 (a) to Chapter 85) or a single passive 
electrical function (resistors, apacitors, inductances, etc.). Discrete components are indivisible 
and are the basic electronic c struction components in a system. 

However, components consi ting of several electric circuit elements and having multiple 
electrical functions, such as i egrated circuits, are not considered as discrete components. 

Electronic integrated circuits include memories (e.g., DRAMS, SRAMs, PROMS, EPROMS, 
EEPROMS (or E2PROMS)) microcontrollers, control circuits, logic circuits, gate arrays, 
interface circuits, etc. 

Electronic integrated circuits i dude : 

(I) Monolithic integrated c rcuits. 

These are microcircuit in which the circuit elements (diodes, transistors, resistors, 
capacitors, inductances, tc.) are created in the mass (essentially) and on the surface of a 
semiconductor material (doped silicon, for example) and are therefore inseparably 
associated. Monolithic • tegrated circuits may be digital, linear (analogue) or digital-
analogue. 

Monolithic integrated cir uits may be presented : • 
(i) Mounted, i.e., with heir terminals or leads, whether or not encased in ceramic, metal 

or plastics. The casings may be cylindrical, in the form of parallelepipeds, etc. 

(ii) Unmounted, i.e., as chips, usually rectangular, with sides generally measuring a few 
millimetres. 

(iii) In the form of undic d wafers (i.e., not yet cut into chips). 

• 
XVI-8542-1 



• 85.42 

Monolithic integrated circuits include : 

(i) Metal oxide semiconductors (MOS technology). 

(ii) Circuits obtained by bipolar technology. 

(iii) Circuits obtained by a combination of bipolar and MOS technologies (BIMOS 
technology). 

Metal oxide semiconductor (MOS), especially complementary metal oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS), and bipolar technologies are the "generic" technologies involved in the 
manufacture of transistors. As the basic components of monolithic integrated circuits, these 
transistors give the integrated circuit its identity. Bipolar circuits are preferred for systems 
where maximum logic speed is sought. On the other hand, MOS circuits are preferred for 
systems in which a high component density and low energy requirements are desirable. 
Further, CMOS circuits have the lowest energy requirements. Thus, they are preferred in 
applications where power supply is limited or where cooling problems are expected. The 
complementary relationship between bipolar and MOS technologies is even more apparent 
in the BICMOS technology, which combines the speed of bipolar circuits with the high 
integration and low power consumption of CMOS circuits. 

(II) Hybrid integrated circuits. 
• 

These are microcircuits built up on an insulating substrate on which a thin or thick film 
circuit has been formed. This process allows certain passive elements (resistors, capacitors, 
inductances, etc.) to be produced at the same time. However, to become a hybrid integrated 
circuit of this heading, semiconductors must be incorporated and mounted on the surface, 
either in the form of chips, whether or not encased, or as encased semiconductors (e.g., in 
specially designed miniature casings). Hybrid integrated circuits may also contain 
separately produced passive elements which are incorporated into the basic film circuit in 
the same way as the semiconductors. Usually these passive elements are components such 
as capacitors, resistors or inductors in the form of chips. 

Substrates made up of several layers, generally ceramic, heat-bonded together to form a 
compact assembly, are to be taken to form a single substrate within the meaning of 
Note 9 (b) (ii) to this Chapter. 

The components forming a hybrid integrated circuit must be combined to all intents and 
purposes indivisibly, i.e., though some of the elements could theoretically be removed 
and replaced, this would be a long and delicate task which would be uneconomic under 

• normal manufacturing conditions. 

(III) Multichip integrated circuits. 

These consist of two or more interconnected monolithic integrated circuits combined to all 
intents and purposes indivisibly, whether or not on one or more insulating substrates, with 
or without leadframes, but with no other active or passive circuit elements. 

Multichip integrated circuits generally come in the following configurations : 

- Two or more monolithic integrated circuits mounted side by side; 

• 
XVI-8542-2 



   

  

 

 

85.42 

- Two or more monolith c integrated circuits stacked one upon the other; 

- Combinations of the configurations above consisting of three or more monolithic 
integrated circuits. 

These monolithic integra ed circuits are combined and interconnected into a single body 
and may be packaged thr •ugh encapsulation or otherwise. They are combined to all intents 
and purposes indivisibly, i.e., though some of the elements could theoretically be removed 
and replaced, this would be a long and delicate task which would be uneconomic under 
normal manufacturing co ditions. 

Insulating substrates of the multichip integrated circuits may incorporate electrically 
conductive regions. Thes regions may be composed of specific materials or formed in 
specific shapes to provid passive functions by means other than discrete circuit elements. 
Where conductive region are present in the substrate, they are typically relied upon as a 
means by which the mo olithic integrated circuits are interconnected. These substrates 
may also be referred to a "interposers" or "spacers" when placed above the bottom-most 
chip or die. 

Monolithic integrated circuits are interconnected by a variety of means, such as adhesives, 
wire bonds, or "flip chip" technology. 

(IV) Multi-component integr ted circuits (MCOs). 

These are combinations f the circuits and elements mentioned in Note 9 (b) (iv) to this 
Chapter. 

Multi-component integrat d circuits (MCOs) are a combination of one or more monolithic, 
hybrid, or multi-chip in egrated circuits with either silicon based sensors, actuators, 
oscillators, resonators an combinations thereof, or one or more components performing 
the functions of articles classifiable under heading 85.32, 85.33, 85.41 or inductors 
classifiable under heading 85.04. 

This includes the possibil.ty that MCOs also can contain MCOs as long as they meet the 
conditions of the Note 9 ( ) (iv) to Chapter 85. 

All separate (tradeable) unit , which are not classifiable under 85.32, 85.33, 85.04, 85.41 or which 
do not fall under the defi ition of silicon based sensors, actuators, resonators, oscillators and 
combinations thereof are excluded from the definition of an MCO (e.g., transformers 
(heading 85.04) or magnets eading 85.05)). 

However, other different elements that are not mentioned but which are intrinsically or 
necessarily part of a M 0 (or of IC packages), such as substrates whether or not 
functioning as printed cir uits, gold wires or conductive regions, or are necessary for the 
construction and function, e.g. mold compound or lead frames, are accepted parts/elements 
of the MCO. 

The integrated circuits an components forming a MCO are combined and interconnected 
physically, electrically or optically into or onto a single body (a component existing as 
particular or independent technical unit with common connection to the outside world 
through pins, leads, balls, lands, bumps, or pads) whether or not on one or more insulating 
substrates, with or witho t lead frames, and may be packaged through encapsulation or 
otherwise. 

XVI-8542-3 



• 85.42 

The components must be combined to all intents and purposes indivisibly, i.e., though 
some of the elements could theoretically be removed and replaced, this would be 
uneconomical under normal manufacturing conditions. 

The MCOs are often intended for mounting with their terminals or leads in, or on, a 
supporting carrier (e.g., printed circuit boards (PCBs) or other carriers, such as thick-film, 
thin-film, insulated metal substrates, etc.) or connecting to an electric interface. Packages 
of the MCOs can be made of several materials, have various designs and forms, and can 
protect the unit from mechanical and environmental influences. 

The MCOs can have different features (e.g., a package can be solid, or have holes, 
windows or membranes) or attachments that are necessary for specific functions. The 
MCOs use these different features and attachments to receive input from outside supplied 
physical or chemical quantities and process these data for output in relation with silicon-
based sensors, actuators, oscillators, resonators. 

They can be used in a variety of applications, including computer, communication (e.g., 
telephones for cellular networks), consumer, industrial or automotive applications. 

• The heading excludes film circuits consisting solely of passive elements (heading 85.34). 

This heading does not include solid-state non-volatile storage devices, "smart cards" and other media for 
the recording of sound or of other phenomena (see heading 85.23 and Note 5 to this Chapter). 

0 
0 0 

Except for the combinations (to all intents and purposes indivisible) referred to in Parts (II), (III) and (IV) 
above concerning hybrid integrated circuits, multichip integrated circuits and multi-component integrated 
circuits (MCOs), the heading also excludes assemblies formed by : 

(a) Mounting one or more discrete components on a support formed, for example, by a printed circuit; 

(b) Adding one or more other devices, such as diodes, transformers, or resistors to an electronic 
microcircuit; 

(c) Combinations of discrete components or combinations of electronic microcircuits other than 
multichip-type or multi-component-type integrated circuits. 

(d) Combinations of one or more monolithic, hybrid, multi-chip, or multi-component integrated circuits 
with components not mentioned in Note 9 (b) (iv) to this Chapter (e.g., transformers (heading 85.04) 
or magnets (heading 85.05)). 

Such assemblies are classified as follows : 

(i) Assemblies which constitute a complete machine or appliance (or one classified as complete), in the 
heading appropriate to the machine or appliance; 

(ii) Other assemblies, in accordance with the provisions for the classification of machine parts 
(Notes 2 (b) and 2 (c) to Section XVI, in particular). 

• 
XVI-8542-4 



85.42 

This is the case, in particular, for ertain electronic memory modules (e.g., SIMMs (Single In-line Memory 
Modules) and DIMMs (Dual In-li e Memory Modules)). Those modules are to be classified by application 
of Note 2 to Section XVI. (See the General Explanatory Note to this Chapter). 

0 
0 0 

PARTS 

Subject to the general pro isions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section X I), parts of the goods of this heading are classified here. 

XVI-8542-5 



• 85.43 

85.43 - Electrical machines and apparatus, having individual functions, not specified or 
included elsewhere in this Chapter. 

8543.10 - Particle accelerators 

8543.20 - Signal generators 

8543.30 - Machines and apparatus for electroplating, electrolysis or electrophoresis 

8543.70 - Other machines and apparatus 

8543.90 - Parts 

This heading covers all electrical appliances and apparatus, not falling in any other heading of 
this Chapter, nor covered more specifically by a heading of any other Chapter of the 
Nomenclature, nor excluded by the operation of a Legal Note to Section XVI or to this Chapter. 
The principal electrical goods covered more specifically by other Chapters are electrical 
machinery of Chapter 84 and certain instruments and apparatus of Chapter 90. 

• The electrical appliances and apparatus of this heading must have individual functions. The 
introductory provisions of Explanatory Note to heading 84.79 concerning machines and 
mechanical appliances having individual functions apply, mutatis mutandis, to the appliances 
and apparatus of this heading. 

Most of the appliances of this heading consist of an assembly of electrical goods or parts 
(valves, transformers, capacitors, chokes, resistors, etc.) operating wholly electrically. However, 
the heading also includes electrical goods incorporating mechanical features provided that such 
features are subsidiary to the electrical function of the machine or appliance. 

The heading includes, inter alia : 

(1) Particle accelerators. These are devices for imparting high kinetic energy to charged 
particles (electrons, protons, etc.). 

Particle accelerators are used mainly in nuclear research, but they also serve in the 
production of radioactive materials, in medical or industrial radiography, for the 
sterilisation of certain products, etc. 

Particle accelerators usually consist of large installations (which may weigh several 
thousands of tons). They comprise a particle source, an acceleration chamber, and devices 
for producing high frequency voltage, variations of the flux or radio-frequencies which are 
used to accelerate the particles. They may contain one or more targets. 

Acceleration, focalisation and deflection of the particles are achieved by electrostatic or 
electro-magnetic devices which are fed by high voltage or high frequency generators. 
Accelerator and generators are often enclosed in an anti-radiation screen. 

The particle accelerators covered by this heading include, Van de Graaff accelerators, 
Cockcroft and Walton accelerators, linear accelerators, cyclotrons, betatrons, 
synchrocyclotrons, synchrotrons, etc. 

Betatrons and other particle accelerators specially adapted for the production of X-rays, including 
those capable of producing either beta-rays or gamma-rays as required, fall in heading 90.22. 

• 
XVI-8543-1 



85.43 • 
(2) Signal generators. These  are apparatus for the production of electrical signals, of known 

wave-form and magnitu le, at an assignable frequency (high or low frequency, for 
example). These include, inter alia : impulse generators, pattern generators, wobbulators 
(sweep generators). 

(3) Mine detectors based o the change of magnetic flux produced in the apparatus when 
brought near to a metal object. Similar detectors are used, for example, for detecting 
foreign metallic bodies i casks of tobacco, food products, timber, etc., and for locating 
buried pipes. 

(4) Mixing units, used in ound recording for combining the output from two or more 
microphones; they are so etimes combined with an amplifier. Audio mixers and equalisers 
are also included under t is heading. But mixing units specialised for cinematography are 
excluded (heading 90.10 

(5) Noise reduction units fo use with sound recording apparatus. 

(6) Defrosters and demist s with electric resistors for aircraft, ships, trains or other 
vehicles (except cycles or motor vehicles - heading 85.12). 

(7) Synchronisers for use Mien several generators are feeding into a common circuit. 

(8) Electrical mine detonato s, consisting of a hand generator (dynamo) and a capacitor. 

(9) High or intermediate fr quency amplifiers (including measurement amplifiers and aerial 
amplifiers). 

(10) Machines and apparatu for electroplating, electrolysis or electrophoresis (other than 
machines and apparatus of heading 84.86 and electrophoresis instruments of 
heading 90.27). 

(11) Ultra-violet irradiation equipment for general industrial uses. 

(12) Ozone generating and diffusing apparatus, electric, designed for non-therapeutic 
purposes (e.g., for mdustri al uses, for the ozonisation of premises 

(13) Electronic musical mod les  for incorporation in a wide variety of utilitarian or other 
goods, e.g., wrist watches , cups and greeting cards. These modules usually consist of an 
electronic integrated circi it, a resistor, a loudspeaker and a mercury cell. They contain 
fixed musical programme 

(14) Electric fence energisers 

(15) Cordless infrared device for the remote control of television receivers, video recorders 
or other electrical equipm nt. 

(16) Electro-luminescent dev ces, generally in strips, plates or panels , and based on electro-
luminescent substances (-.g., zinc sulphide) placed between two layers of conductive 
material. 

(17) Digital flight-data recor ers (flight recorders) in the form of a fire-proof, crash-proof 
electronic apparatus for th- continuous in-flight recording of specific flight data. 

XVI-8543-2 



• 85.43 

This heading excludes : 

(a) Ion implanters for doping semiconductor or flat panel materials (heading 84.86). 

(b) Apparatus for physical vapour deposition for the manufacture of semiconductor wafers, 
semiconductor devices, electronic integrated circuits, or flat panel displays (heading 84.86). 

(c) "Smart cards" (including proximity cards or tags) as defined in Note 5 (b) to this Chapter 
(heading 85.23). 

PARTS 

Subject to the general provisions regarding the classification of parts (see the General 
Explanatory Note to Section XVI), parts of the goods of this heading are also classified here. 

• 

• 

• 
XVI-8543-3 



85.44 

85.44 - Insulated (including namelled or anodised) wire, cable (including co-axial cable) 
and other insulated electric conductors, whether or not fitted with connectors; 
optical fibre cables, made up of individually sheathed fibres, whether or not 
assembled with electr c conductors or fitted with connectors. 

- Winding w re : 

8544.11 - - Of coppe 

8544.19 - - Other 

8544.20 - Co-axial ca  le and other co-axial electric conductors 

8544.30 - Ignition wi ng sets and other wiring sets of a kind used in vehicles, aircraft 
or ships 

- Other elec c conductors, for a voltage not exceeding 1,000 V : 

8544.42 - - Fitted wit connectors 

8544.49 - - Other 

8544.60 - Other elect c conductors, for a voltage exceeding 1,000 V 

8544.70 - Optical fib cables 

Provided they are insulated, t is heading covers electric wire, cable and other conductors (e.g., 
braids, strip, bars) used as onductors in electrical machinery, apparatus or installations. 
Subject to this condition, the eating includes wiring for interior work or for exterior use (e.g., 
underground, submarine or ae ial wires or cables). These goods vary from very fine insulated 
wire to thick cables of more c plex types. 

Non-metal conductors are also covered by this heading. 

The goods of this heading are nade up of the following elements : 

(A) A conductor - this may b single strand or multiple, and may be wholly of one metal or of 
different metals. 

(B) One or more coverings f insulating material - the aim of these coverings is to prevent 
leakage of electric curre t from the conductor, and to protect it against damage. The 
insulating materials most used are rubber, paper, plastics, asbestos, mica, micanite, glass 
fibre yarns, textile yarns (whether or not waxed or impregnated), varnish, enamel, pitch, 
oil, etc. In certain cases t insulation is obtained by anodising or by a similar process (e.g., 
the production of a surfac coating of metallic oxides or salts). 

(C) In certain cases a metal sheath (e.g., lead, brass, aluminium or steel); this serves as a 
protective covering for t e insulation, as a channel for an insulation of gas or oil, or as a 
supplementary conductor n certain co-axial cables. 

(D) Sometimes a metal armo ng (e.g., spiral wound steel or iron wire or strip), used mainly 
for protecting undergroun or submarine cable. 

The insulated wires, cables, et' ., of this heading may be in the form of : 

(i) Single or multiple strand • sulated wire. 

(ii) Two or more such insulat d wires twisted together. 

XVI-8544-1 



• 85.44 

(iii) Two or more such insulated wires assembled together in a common insulating sheath. 

The heading covers, inter alia : 

(1) Lacquered or enamelled wire, usually very thin and mainly used for coil windings. 

(2) Anodised, etc., wire. 

(3) Telecommunications wires and cables (including submarine cables and data transmission 
wires and cables) are generally made up of a pair, a quad or a cable core, the whole usually 
covered with a sheath. A pair or a quad consists of two or four insulated wires, 
respectively (each wire is made up of a single copper conductor insulated with a coloured 
material of plastics having a thickness not exceeding 0.5 mm), twisted together. A cable 
core consists of a single pair or a quad or multiple stranded pairs or quads. 

(4) Insulated aerial cables. 

(5) Cables for permanent long-distance connections often with channels for filling with 
insulating gas or oil. 

(6) Armoured underground cables with anti-corrosive sheathing. 
• 

(7) Cables for use in mine shafts; these have a longitudinal armouring to withstand the effects 
of tension. 

In addition the heading covers plaited wire coated with lacquer or inserted in an insulating 
sheath. 

It also includes insulated strip generally used in large electrical machinery or control equipment. 

Wire, cable, etc., remain classified in this heading if cut to length or fitted with connectors (e.g., 
plugs, sockets, lugs, jacks, sleeves or terminals) at one or both ends. The heading also includes 
wire, etc., of the types described above made up in sets (e.g., multiple cables for connecting 
motor vehicle sparking plugs to the distributor). 

The heading also covers optical fibre cables, made up of individually sheathed fibres, whether 
or not assembled with electric conductors or fitted with connectors. The sheaths are usually of 
different colours to permit identification of the fibres at both ends of the cable. Optical fibre 
cables are used mainly in telecommunications because their capacity for the transmission of 

• data is greater than that of electrical conductors. 

The heading excludes electric heating resistors sheathed in insulating material (e.g., special alloy wire 
wound spirally around a core of glass fibres or asbestos) of heading 85.16; connectors for optical fibres, 
optical fibre bundles or cables of heading 85.36. 

• 
XVI-8544-2 



85.45 • 
85.45 - Carbon electrodes, arbon brushes, lamp carbons, battery carbons and other 

articles of graphite r other carbon, with or without metal, of a kind used for 
electrical purposes. 

- Electrodes 

8545.11 - - Of a kind sed for furnaces 

8545.19 - - Other 

8545.20 - Brushes 

8545.90 - Other 

This heading covers all articl s of graphite or other carbon which are recognisable by their 
shape, dimensions or otherwi e, as being for electrical purposes, whether or not they contain 
metal. 

In general, these articles are obtained by the extrusion or by the moulding (usually under 
pressure) and heat-treatment o a composition which, in addition to its basic constituent (natural 
carbon, carbon black, gas car on, coke, natural or artificial graphite, etc.) and the necessary 
binders (pitch, tar, etc.), may a so contain other substances such as metallic powders. 

In some cases the articles of is heading may be coated electrolytically or by spraying (e.g., 
with copper) to increase the conductivity and decrease their rate of wear. They remain 
classified here even if fitted wi eyelets, terminals or other means of connection. 

The heading includes : 

(A) Carbon electrodes for fu naces. 

These are generally in the form of cylinders or rods, and are sometimes threaded or tapped 
at the ends to enable them to be screwed into position. 

(B) Carbon welding electrod s. 

These are generally in the orm of rods. 

(C) Carbon electrodes for el ctrolysis. 

These may be in the fo of plates, bars (including bars of triangular cross-section), 
cylinders, etc. They are esigned to be mounted or suspended in electrolysis baths, and 
may be furnished with fitt ngs for this purpose such as hooks or rings. Certain types may be 
pierced with holes or groo ed to facilitate the removal of gases formed on them during use. 

(D) Carbon brushes. 

These are used as slidin contacts for generators, motors, etc., as current-collectors for 
electric locomotives, etc. Though some may be made by direct moulding, the large 
majority are cut from th "carbon" blocks or plates described in Explanatory Note to 
heading 38.01. They are all made very accurately to size and the faces are carefully 
machined to tolerances f a few hundredths of a millimetre. They can therefore be 
indentified by their sizes, shapes, and highly-finished surfaces; in many cases, they may 
also be wholly or partly metal-coated or be fitted with connectors (brackets, cables, 
terminals, springs, etc.). 

XVI-8545-1 



• 85.45 

Such carbon brushes may be of any of the grades described in Explanatory Note to 
heading 38.01, or may contain silver. 

This heading does not, however, include metal brushes coated with an external lubricating layer of 
graphite (heading 85.35 or 85.36). Brush holders (whether or not complete with their brushes) are 
classified as parts of machines (e.g., heading 85.03). 

(E) Arc-lamp or other lamp carbons. 

Arc-lamp carbons are usually in the form of rods or pencils; they sometimes have a core of 
special composition to improve arc stability and to provide high intensity light output, or to 
give the flame a special colour. The heading also covers carbon filaments for electrical 
resistance lamps. 

(F) Battery carbons. 

According to the type of battery for which they are intended, these may be in the form of 
rods, plates, tubes, etc. 

• (G) Carbon parts of microphones. 

These may consist of discs or other identifiable parts. 

(H) Other articles of graphite or other carbon, such as : 

(1) Connecting pieces (nipples) for joining together furnace carbons. 

(2) Anodes, grids and screens for rectifying valves. 

(3) Heating resistors, in the form of rods, bars, etc., for various types of heating apparatus. 

(4) Resistance discs and plates for automatic voltage regulators. 

(5) Other contacts or electrodes of carbon. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Graphite or other carbon in the form of powders or granules (Chapter 38). 

(b) Carbon resistors (heading 85.33). 

• 

• 
XVI-8545-2 



85.46 • 
85.46 - Electrical insulators if  any material. 

8546.10 - Of glass 

8546.20 - Of ceramic. 

8546.90 - Other 

Insulators of this heading ar used for the fixing, supporting or guiding of electric current 
conductors while at the same me insulating them electncally from each other, from earth, etc. 
The heading excludes insul ting fittings (other than insulators) for electrical machinery, 
appliances or equipment; thes fittings fall in heading 85.47 if they consist wholly of insulating 
material (apart from any min r components of metal incorporated during moulding solely for 
purposes of assembly). 

Usually there is a relation be een the size of the insulator and the voltage (large for high 
voltages, smaller for low volt ges). Similarly, the shape of the various types of insulators is 
influenced by electric, thermi and mechanical considerations. The external surface is very 
smooth in order to prevent the formation of deposits of non-insulating materials, such as water, 
salts, dusts, oxides and smok . Insulators are often given bell, accordion, petticoat, grooved, 
cylinder or other shapes. Certa n types are constructed in such a way that when in position they 
may contain oil to prevent con amination of the surface by conducting materials. 

Insulators may be made of a y insulating material, usually very hard and non-porous, e.g., 
ceramic material (porcelain, steatite), glass, fused basalt, hardened rubber, plastics or 
compounded insulating mate ials. They may contain fixing devices (e.g., metal brackets, 
screws, bolts, clips, laces, slin s, pins, cross pieces, caps, rods, suspension or carrying clamps). 
Insulators equipped with met 1 horns or guard shields or other devices to form lightning 
arresters are excluded (headin 85.35). 

Insulators are used on outdoo cables, e.g., in telecommunications, power networks, electrical 
traction systems (railway, tra way, trolleybus, etc.), and also for indoor installations or on 
certain machines and applianc s. 

The insulators of this heading i elude : 

(A) Suspension insulators, s ch as : 

(1) Chain suspension in 'u lators. These are used mainly on outdoor networks, and consist 
of several insulating e ements. The conductor cable or wire is fixed at the bottom of the 
assembly which is hu g on a suitable support (pylon arm, suspension cable, etc.). 

Suspension chain in lators include cap or hood type insulators, double petticoat 
insulators; chain link sulators; linked rod insulators. 

(2) Other suspension in ulators (e.g., insulators in the form of balls, bells, pulleys, etc.) 
for overhead lines of r ilways, trolleybuses, cranes, etc., or for aerials. 

(B) Rigid insulators. 

These may be fitted wit supports (e.g., metal hooks, pins or the like); or they may be 
without supports, but inte ded to be attached to power or telegraph poles, etc., or fitted to 
walls, ceilings, floors, et ., by means of nails, screws, bolts, etc. Insulators with fixed 
supports may be built u of two or more elements; those without supports are usually 
single units. They may be of various shapes (e.g., bells, cones, cylinders, buttons, pulleys). 

XVI-8546-1 



• 85.46 

(C) Leading-in insulators. 

These are used for guiding cables or wires through walls, etc. They are of various forms 
(e.g., cone or double cone shaped insulators, disc insulators, sleeves, pipes and tubular 
bends). 

The heading excludes insulated electrical conduit tubing and joints therefor (heading 85.47). 

• 

• 

• 
XVI-8546-2 



  

85.47 

85.47 Insulating fittings fo electrical machines, appliances or equipment, being fittings 
wholly of insulating material apart from any minor components of metal (for 
example, threaded s ckets) incorporated during moulding solely for purposes of 
assembly, other than nsulators of heading 85.46; electrical conduit tubing and joints 
therefor, of base met lined with insulating material. 

8547.10 - Insulating ttings of ceramics 

8547.20 - Insulating ttings of plastics 

8547.90 - Other 

(A) INSULATIN FITTINGS FOR ELECTRICAL MACHINES, 
APPLIANCES 0 EQUIPMENT, BEING FITTINGS WHOLLY 

OF INSULATI G MATERIAL APART FROM ANY MINOR 
COMPONENTS OF ETAL (FOR EXAMPLE, THREADED SOCKETS) 
INCORPORATED D RING MOULDING SOLELY FOR PURPOSES OF 

ASSEMBLY, OT ER THAN INSULATORS OF HEADING 85.46 

With the exception of insula • rs as such (heading 85.46), this group covers all fittings for 
electrical machinery, appliance or apparatus, provided : 

(i) They are wholly of insulating material, or are wholly of insulating material (e.g., 
plastics) apart fro any minor components of metal (screws, threaded sockets, 
sleeves, etc.) incorpo ated during moulding solely for purposes of assembly. 

and (ii) They are designed f r insulating purposes even though at the same time they have 
other functions (e.g., rotection). 

In general the fittings of this gr up are obtained by moulding or casting, or by sawing, cutting or 
otherwise working the raw mat rial. They may be drilled, threaded, filed, grooved, etc. 

They may be made of any ins lating material (e.g., glass, ceramics, steatite, hardened rubber, 
plastics, resin impregnated pap r or paperboard, asbestos-cement or mica). 

These fittings may be in vario s forms. This group includes, inter alia, covers, bases and other 
parts of switches, circuit brea ers, etc.; bases and supports for fuses; rings and other parts for 
lamp-holders; formers for resis ors or coils; connection strips and dominoes not fitted with their 
terminals; cores for bobbins an windings of various kinds; sparking plug bodies. 

The heading does not cover fitti gs which, even though made wholly of insulating material (or made 
wholly of insulating material apa from any minor components of metal incorporated during moulding 
solely for the purposes of assembl ), have not been specially constructed for insulating purposes, such as 
containers, covers and separator pl tes for accumulators (heading 85.07). 

XVI-8547-1 



• 85.47 

(B) ELECTRICAL CONDUIT TUBING AND JOINTS THEREFOR, 
OF BASE METAL LINED WITH INSULATING MATERIAL 

This group covers the metal tubing used in permanent electrical installations (e.g., house wiring) 
as insulation and protection for the wires, provided it has an interior lining of insulating 
material. Uninsulated metal tubing, often used for the same purpose, is excluded (Section XV). 

The tubing of this group consists either of spiralled metal strip wound on to an interior tube of 
insulating material, or of rigid metal tubing (usually iron or steel) coated or lined on the inside 
with insulating material. The insulating material may be special electrically insulating varnish, 
paper or paperboard, rubber, plastics, etc. Metal tubing simply coated with varnish to prevent 
corrosion is excluded (Section XV). 

This group also covers joints used for connecting the tubing of this heading provided they are 
also of base metal and coated or lined with insulating material (e.g., straight joints, elbows, tee 
joints and cross-overs). 

Joints such as tee joints, cross-overs, etc., fitted with terminals for electrical connections are excluded 
(heading 85.35 or 85.36). 

The heading also excludes tubing wholly of insulating material (e.g., of rubber, plastics, braided textile 
yams or glass fibre yarns); this is classified according to the constituent material, unless constituting an 
insulator of heading 85.46. 

• 

XVI-8547-2 



85.48 • 
85.48 - Waste and scrap of primary cells, primary batteries and electric accumulators; 

spent primary cells, spent primary batteries and spent electric accumulators; 
electrical parts of m • chinery or apparatus, not specified or included elsewhere in 
this Chapter. 

8548.10 - Waste an scrap of primary cells, primary batteries and electric 
accumulato s; spent primary cells, spent primary batteries and spent electric 
accumulato s 

8548.90 - Other 

(A) WASTE AND SCRAP OF PRIMARY CELLS, PRIMARY BATTERIES AND 
ELECTRIC ACCUMUL TORS; SPENT PRIMARY CELLS, SPENT PRIMARY 

BATTERIES A D SPENT ELECTRIC ACCUMULATORS 

This heading covers waste a d scrap of primary cells, of primary batteries and of electric 
accumulators, as well as sp nt primary cells, spent primary batteries and spent electric 
accumulators, as defined in No e 10 to this Chapter. 

These products are generally dentifiable as waste obtained during manufacture, or consist of • 
primary cells, primary batten: s and electric accumulators which are definitively unusable as 
such because of breakage, c tting-up, wear or other reasons, or are not capable of being 
recharged, and scrap thereof. 

These products take the form i f consignments and generally come from the manufacturers of 
primary cells, primary batterie and electric accumulators; from scrap merchants who buy waste 
and scrap from manufacture s; and from merchants who collect and dismantle electric 
accumulators or collect prima cells and primary batteries. 

Consignments from battery m nufacturers may consist of positive plates with a few negative 
plates; negative plates with a ew positive plates; a mixture of positive and negative plates in 
equal proportion; half-assembl d elements (e.g., reels made up of a negative plate and a positive 
plate separated by a fabric "s parator" and coiled). The reels may also be already assembled 
inside the container. They may also be mixed with defective finished batteries unusable as such. 

Consignments from the disma ling or reclamation of old batteries contain a mixture of positive 
and negative plates, with or wi out separator, as packs, plates or reels. 

Spent primary cells, spent p 'mary batteries and spent electric accumulators are generally 
intended for processing to rec .ver metals (lead, nickel, cadmium, etc.) metal compounds or 
slag. 

Spent electric accumulators ge erally have the electrolyte removed and bear signs of wear. 

(B) ELECTRICAL P RTS OF MACHINERY OR APPARATUS NOT 
SPECIFIED OR I CLUDED ELSEWHERE IN THIS CHAPTER 

This heading also includes all e ectrical parts of machinery or apparatus, other than : 

(a) Those suitable for use sole y or principally with a particular machine or appliance. 

XVI-8548-1 



• 85.48 

(b) Parts covered by an earlier heading of this Chapter or which are excluded by Note 1 to 
Section XVI. 

This heading therefore covers articles which are identifiable as electrical parts of machinery or 
apparatus but not as parts of a particular machine or apparatus, and which incorporate 
electrical connections, insulated sections, coils, contacts or other specifically electrical elements. 

• 

• 

• 
XVI-8548-2 



• 

• 



• XVII 

Section XVII 

VEHICLES, AIRCRAFT, VESSELS 
AND ASSOCIATED TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT 

Notes. 

1.- This Section does not cover articles of heading 95.03 or 95.08, or bobsleighs, toboggans or the like of 
heading 95.06. 

2.- The expressions "parts" and "parts and accessories" do not apply to the following articles, whether or 
not they are identifiable as for the goods of this Section : 

(a) Joints, washers or the like of any material (classified according to their constituent material or in 
heading 84.84) or other articles of vulcanised rubber other than hard rubber (heading 40.16); 

• (b) Parts of general use, as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV), or similar 
goods of plastics (Chapter 39); 

(c) Articles of Chapter 82 (tools); 

(d) Articles of heading 83.06; 

(e) Machines or apparatus of headings 84.01 to 84.79, or parts thereof, other than the radiators for 
the articles of this Section; articles of heading 84.81 or 84.82 or, provided they constitute integral 
parts of engines or motors, articles of heading 84.83; 

(f) Electrical machinery or equipment (Chapter 85); 

(g) Articles of Chapter 90; 

(h) Articles of Chapter 91; 

(ij) Arms (Chapter 93); 

(k) Lamps or lighting fittings of heading 94.05; or 

(1) Brushes of a kind used as parts of vehicles (heading 96.03). 

3.- References in Chapters 86 to 88 to "parts" or "accessories" do not apply to parts or accessories which 
are not suitable for use solely or principally with the articles of those Chapters. A part or accessory 
which answers to a description in two or more of the headings of those Chapters is to be classified 
under that heading which corresponds to the principal use of that part or accessory. 

4.- For the purposes of this Section : 

(a) Vehicles specially constructed to travel on both road and rail are classified under the appropriate 
heading of Chapter 87; 

(b) Amphibious motor vehicles are classified under the appropriate heading of Chapter 87; 

(c) Aircraft specially constructed so that they can also be used as road vehicles are classified under 
the appropriate heading of Chapter 88. 

5.- Air-cushion vehicles are to be classified within this Section with the vehicles to which they are most 
akin as follows : 

(a) In Chapter 86 if designed to travel on a guide-track (hovertrains); 

(b) In Chapter 87 if designed to travel over land or over both land and water; 

• 
XVII-1 



XVII • 
(c) In Chapter 89 if design d to travel over water, whether or not able to land on beaches or 

landing-stages or also abl to travel over ice. 

Parts and accessories of air-c hion vehicles are to be classified in the same way as those of vehicles 
of the heading in which the ai -cushion vehicles are classified under the above provisions. 

Hovertrain track fixtures and fittings are to be classified as railway track fixtures and fittings, and 
signalling, safety or traffic co trol equipment for hovertrain transport systems as signalling, safety or 
traffic control equipment for r ilways. 

GENERAL 

(I) GEN RAL CONTENT OF THE SECTION 

This Section covers railway ehicles of all types and hovertrains (Chapter 86), other land 
vehicles, including air-cushio vehicles (Chapter 87), aircraft and spacecraft (Chapter 88) and 
ships, boats, hovercraft and fib ting structures (Chapter 89), except the following : 
(a) Certain mobile machines (see Part (II) below). 

(b) Demonstrational models of h ading 90.23. 

(c) Toys, certain winter sports e uipment, and vehicles for fairground use. The Section excludes, for 
example, toy cycles (other t an bicycles), pedal cars, etc., designed to be ridden by children, toy 
boats and aircraft (heading 9 .03); bobsleighs, toboggans and the like (heading 95.06); "dodge'em" 
cars (heading 95.08). 

In addition, the Section includ s certain specified items of associated transport equipment such 
as containers specially designe and equipped for carriage by one or more modes of transport, 
certain railway or tramwa track fittings and fixtures, and mechanical (including 
electro-mechanical) signalling quipment (Chapter 86) and parachutes, aircraft launching gear, 
deck-arrestor or similar gear an ground flying trainers (Chapter 88). 

Subject to the provisions of Pa (III) below, the Section also covers parts and accessories of the 
vehicles, aircraft, etc., of Chapt rs 86 to 88. 

(II) SELF-PRO ELLED OR OTHER MOBILE MACHINES 

Many machines or equipment ( n particular of the type falling in Section XVI) can be mounted 
on the vehicle chassis or on the floating bases of Section XVII; the classification of the resultant 
mobile machine depends on va 'ous factors, in particular on the type of base. 

For example, all mobile mac ines, formed by mounting a machine on a floating base are 
classified in Chapter 89 (e.g., floating cranes, dredgers, grain elevators, etc.). For the 
classification of mobile mach nes formed by mounting equipment on a vehicle chassis of 
Chapter 86 or 87, see the Expla atory Notes to heading 86.04, 87.01, 87.05, 87.09 or 87.16. 

XVII-2 



• XVII 

(III) PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

It should be noted that Chapter 89 makes no provision for parts (other than hulls) or accessories 
of ships, boats or floating structures. Such parts and accessories, even if identifiable as being for 
ships, etc., are therefore classified in other Chapters in their respective headings. The other 
Chapters of this Section each provide for the classification of parts and accessories of the 
vehicles, aircraft or equipment concerned. 

It should, however, be noted that these headings apply only to those parts or accessories which 
comply with all three of the following conditions : 

(a) They must not be excluded by the terms of Note 2 to this Section (see paragraph (A) 
below). 

and (b) They must be suitable for use solely or principally with the articles of Chapters 86 
to 88 (see paragraph (B) below). 

and (c) They must not be more specifically included elsewhere in the Nomenclature (see 

• paragraph (C) below). 

(A) Parts and accessories excluded by Note 2 to Section XVII. 

This Note excludes the following parts and accessories, whether or not they are identifiable as for 
the articles of this Section : 

(1) Joints, gaskets, washers and the like, of any material (classified according to their 
constituent material or in heading 84.84) and other articles of vulcanised rubber other than 
hard rubber (e.g., mudguard-flaps and pedal covers) (heading 40.16). 

(2) Parts of general use as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, for example, cable and chain 
(whether or not cut to length or equipped with end fittings, other than brake cables, accelerator 
cables and similar cables suitable for use in vehicles of Chapter 87), nails, bolts, nuts, 
washers, cotters and cotter-pins, springs (including leaf springs for vehicles) (such goods of 
base metals fall in Chapters 73 to 76 and 78 to 81, and similar goods of plastics fall in 
Chapter 39), and locks, fittings or mountings for vehicle coachwork (e.g., made up 
ornamental beading strips, hinges, door handles, grip bars, foot rests, window opening 
mechanisms), number plates, nationality plates, etc. (such goods of base metals fall in 
Chapter 83, and similar goods of plastics fall in Chapter 39). 

(3) Spanners, wrenches and other tools of Chapter 82. 

(4) Bells (e.g., for cycles) and other articles of heading 83.06. 

(5) Machines and mechanical appliances, and parts thereof, of headings 84.01 to 84.79, for 
example : 

(a) Boilers and boiler equipment (heading 84.02 or 84.04). 

(b) Producer gas generators (e.g., for cars) (heading 84.05). 

(c) Steam turbines of heading 84.06. 

(d) Engines of all kinds including engines fitted with gear boxes and parts thereof, falling in 
headings 84.07 to 84.12. 

(e) Pumps, compressors and fans (heading 84.13 or 84.14). 

(f) Air-conditioning machines (heading 84.15). 

• 
XVII-3 



XVII • 
(g) Mechanical app lances for projecting, dispersing or spraying liquids or powders; fire 

extinguishers (h ading 84.24). 

(h)	Lifting, handlin loading or unloading machinery (e.g., hoists, jacks, derricks), moving, 
grading, levelli g, scraping, excavating, tamping, compacting, extracting or boring 
machinery, for e rth, minerals or ores (heading 84.25, 84.26, 84.28, 84.30 or 84.31). 

(ij)	 Agricultural ma hinery of heading 84.32 or 84.33 (e.g., threshing, seed distributing, 
mowing, etc., a achments) constructed for mounting on vehicles. 

(k) Machinery of a ind described in heading 84.74. 

(1)	Windscreen wip ng mechanisms of heading 84.79. 

(6) Certain other goods o Chapter 84, e.g. : 

(a) Taps, cocks, va yes and similar appliances (e.g., radiator drainage taps, inner-tube 
valves) (headin 84.81). 

(b) Ball or roller be  ngs (heading 84.82). 

(c)	Internal parts of engines or motors (crank shafts, cam shafts, flywheels, etc.) falling in 
heading 84.83. • 

(7) Electrical machinery r equipment of Chapter 85, for example : 

(a) Electric motors, venerators, transformers, etc., of heading 85.01 or 85.04. 

(b) Electro-magnets, electro-magnetic clutches, brakes, etc., of heading 85.05. 

(c) Electric accumul tors (heading 85.07). 

(d)  Electrical igniti in or starting equipment of a kind used for spark-ignition or 
compression-ign tion internal combustion engines (sparking plugs, starter motors, etc.) 
(heading 85.11). 

(e) Electrical lightin , signalling, windscreen wiping, defrosting, demisting, equipment for 
cycles or motor vehicles (heading 85.12); electrical signalling apparatus for other 
vehicles (e.g., tr ins) or for aircraft or ships (heading 85.31); electrical defrosters or 
demisters for suc other vehicles, aircraft or ships (heading 85.43). 
	

(0 Electric heating nits for motor or railway vehicles, aircraft, etc. (heading 85.16). 

(g) Microphones, lo dspeakers and audio-frequency electric amplifiers (heading 85.18). 

(h) Radio transmitte and receivers (heading 85.25 or 85.27). 
	

(ij) Electrical capacit yrs (heading 85.32). 
	

(k) Pantographs and other current collectors for electric traction vehicles, and fuses, 
switches and oth r electrical apparatus of heading 85.35 or 85.36. 
	

(1) Electric filament amps and electric discharge lamps, including sealed beam lamp units, 
of heading 85.39 

XVII-4 



• XVII 

(m) Other electrical fittings, such as insulated electric wire and cable (including wiring sets) 
and electrical articles of graphite or other carbon, whether or not fitted with terminals; 
insulators, insulating fittings (headings 85.44 to 85.48). 

(8) Instruments and apparatus of Chapter 90, including those used on certain vehicles, such 
as : 

(a) Photographic or cinematographic cameras (heading 90.06 or 90.07). 

(b) Navigational instruments and appliances (heading 90.14). 

(c) Instruments and appliances used in medical, surgical, dental or veterinary sciences 
(heading 90.18). 

(d) Apparatus based on the use of X-rays and other apparatus of heading 90.22. 

(e) Manometers (heading 90.26). 

(f) Revolution counters, taximeters, speed indicators and tachometers and other 

• instruments and apparatus of heading 90.29. 

(g) Measuring or checking instruments, appliances and machines of heading 90.31. 

(9) Clocks (e.g., instrument panel clocks) (Chapter 91). 

(10) Arms (Chapter 93). 

(11) Lamps and lighting fittings (e.g., headlamps for aircraft or trains) of heading 94.05. 

(12) Brushes (e.g., for road sweeper lorries) (heading 96.03). 

(B) Criterion of sole or principal use. 

(1) Parts and accessories classifiable both in Section XVII and in another Section. 

Under Section Note 3, parts and accessories which are not suitable for use solely or 
principally with the articles of Chapters 86 to 88 are excluded from those Chapters. 

The effect of Note 3 is therefore that when a part or accessory can fall in one or more 
other Sections as well as in Section XVII, its final classification is determined by its 
principal use. Thus the steering gear, braking systems, road wheels, mudguards, etc., 
used on many of the mobile machines falling in Chapter 84, are virtually identical with 
those used on the lorries of Chapter 87, and since their principal use is with lorries, 
such parts and accessories are classified in this Section. 

(2) Parts and accessories classifiable in two or more headings of the Section. 

Certain parts and accessories are suitable for use on more than one type of vehicle 
(motor cars, aircraft, motorcycles, etc.); examples of such goods include brakes, 
steering systems, wheels, axles, etc. Such parts and accessories are to be classified in 
the heading relating to the parts and accessories of the vehicles with which they are 
principally used. 

• 
XVII-5 



XVII • 
(C) Parts and accessories co ered more specifically elsewhere in the Nomenclature. 

Parts and accessories, even *f identifiable as for the articles of this Section, are excluded if they are 
covered more specifically b another heading elsewhere in the Nomenclature, e.g. : 

(1) Profile shapes of vul nised rubber other than hard rubber, whether or not cut to length 
(heading 40.08). 

(2) Transmission belts of lcanised rubber (heading 40.10). 

(3) Rubber tyres, interchan eable tyre treads, tyre flaps and inner tubes (headings 40.11 to 40.13). 

(4) Tool bags of leather or f composition leather, of vulcanised fibre, etc. (heading 42.02). 

(5) Bicycle or balloon nets heading 56.08). 

(6) Towing ropes (headin 56.09). 

(7) Textile carpets (Chapt r 57). 

(8) Unframed safety glass consisting of toughened or laminated glass, whether or not shaped 
(heading 70.07). 

(9) Rear-view mirrors (hea ing 70.09 or Chapter 90 - see the corresponding Explanatory Notes). 

(10) Unframed glass for ehicle headlamps (heading 70.14) and, in general, the goods of 
Chapter 70. 

(11) Flexible shafts for spee indicators, revolution counters, etc. (heading 84.83). 

(12) Vehicle seats of headin 94.01. 

XVII-6 



• 86 

Chapter 86 

Railway or tramway locomotives, rolling-stock and parts thereof; 
railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings and parts thereof; 

mechanical (including electro-mechanical) 
traffic signalling equipment of all kinds 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Railway or tramway sleepers of wood or of concrete, or concrete guide-track sections for 
hovertrains (heading 44.06 or 68.10); 

(b) Railway or tramway track construction material of iron or steel of heading 73.02; or 

• (c) Electrical signalling, safety or traffic control equipment of heading 85.30. 

2.- Heading 86.07 applies, inter alia, to : 

(a) Axles, wheels, wheel sets (running gear), metal tyres, hoops and hubs and other parts of wheels; 

(b) Frames, underframes, bogies and bissel-bogies; 

(c) Axle boxes; brake gear; 

(d) Buffers for rolling-stock; hooks and other coupling gear and corridor connections; 

(e) Coachwork. 

3.- Subject to the provisions of Note 1 above, heading 86.08 applies, inter alia, to : 

(a) Assembled track, turntables, platform buffers, loading gauges; 

(b) Semaphores, mechanical signal discs, level crossing control gear, signal and point controls, and 
other mechanical (including electro-mechanical) signalling, safety or traffic control equipment, 
whether or not fitted for electric lighting, for railways, tramways, roads, inland waterways, 
parking facilities, port installations or airfields. 

GENERAL 
This Chapter covers locomotives and rolling-stock, and parts thereof, and certain track fixtures 
and fittings, for railways or tramways of any kind (including narrow gauge railways, single rail 
railways, etc.). It also covers containers specially designed and equipped for carriage by one or 
more modes of transport. Mechanical (including electro-mechanical) signalling, safety or traffic 
control equipment for traffic of all kinds (including that for parking facilities) is also covered. 

Throughout this Chapter, the expressions "railway" and "tramway" refer not only to 
conventional railways and tramways using steel rails, but also to similar guided systems such as 
those using magnetic levitation or concrete tracks. 

XVII-86-1 



86 • 
These various goods are classi II ed as follows : 

(A) Self-propelled railway v ides of all types, such as locomotives, motorised railway or 
tramway coaches and rai -cars (headings 86.01 to 86.03). Heading 86.02 also includes 
locomotive tenders. Loc el otives operated by two types of power are classified in the 
heading corresponding to e main type of power used. 

(B) Railway or tramway m. intenance or service vehicles, whether or not self-propelled 
(heading 86.04). 

(C) Various types of hauled v hides (railway or tramway passenger coaches and luggage vans, 
railway or tramway goods vans, wagons and trucks, etc.) (headings 86.05 and 86.06). 

(D) Parts of railway or tram ay locomotives and rolling-stock (heading 86.07), and also 
railway or tramway ack fixtures and fittings, and mechanical (including 
electro-mechanical) equip ent, for signalling to or controlling road, rail or other vehicles, 
ships or aircraft (heading :6.08). 

(E) Containers specially desig ed and equipped for carriage by one or more modes of transport 
(heading 86.09). 

The Chapter also includes air-c shion vehicles designed to travel on a guide-track (hovertrains), 
parts of these vehicles, and hovertrain track fixtures, fittings and mechanical (including 
electro-mechanical) signalling safety or traffic control equipment for hovertrain transport 
systems (see Note 5 to Section ► VII). 

Incomplete or unfinished ye ides are classified with the corresponding complete or finished 
vehicles, provided they have t e essential character thereof. Such vehicles may include : 

(1) Locomotives or motorise railway or tramway coaches, not fitted with a power unit, 
measuring instruments, sa ty apparatus or service equipment. 

(2) Passenger coaches not fitted with seats. 

(3) Truck underframes compl te with suspension and wheels. 

On the other hand, bodies of otorised railway or tramway coaches, of vans, wagons or trucks 
or of tenders, not mounted o underframes, are classified as parts of railway or tramway 
locomotives or rolling-stock (h ading 86.07). 
The Chapter excludes : 

(a) Model railway rolling-stock far demonstrational purposes, of heading 90.23. 

(b) Heavy artillery mounted on ra lway trucks (heading 93.01). 

(c) Toy trains (heading 95.03). 

(d) Equipment not constituting ra i ling-stock proper, specially designed for use on roundabouts or other 
fairground amusements (head ng 95.08). 

XVII-86-2 



• 86.01 

86.01 - Rail locomotives powered from an external source of electricity or by electric 
accumulators. 

8601.10 - Powered from an external source of electricity 

8601.20 - Powered by electric accumulators 

This heading covers all types of electric locomotives in which the required electrical energy is 
derived either from powerful accumulators carried on the vehicle, or from an external conductor 
which may be either a rail or an overhead cable. 

• 

• 

• 
XVII-8601-1 



   

  

   

  

86.02 

86.02 - Other rail locomotive ; locomotive tenders. 

8602.10 - Diesel-elect is locomotives 

8602.90 - Other 

(A) LOCOMOTIVES 

This group covers all types o rail locomotives other than those powered from an external 
source of electricity or by ele tric accumulators (heading 86.01) whatever the type of power 
unit (steam engine, diesel engi , gas turbine, petrol engine, pneumatic power engine, etc). 

These include : 

(1) Diesel locomotives which are of three types : 

(a) Diesel-electric locom tives in which the diesel engine drives a generator to produce 
electricity which in to powers traction motors driving the wheels. 

(b) Diesel-hydraulic loco otives in which power from a diesel engine is transmitted to 
the wheels using a hyd aulic system. 

(c) Diesel-mechanical lo omotives where power from the diesel engine reaches the 
wheels through a elute or fluid flywheel and gear box. 

(2) Steam locomotives of all pes, including turbine locomotives using an electric drive, tank 
locomotives and fireless 1 I comotives, i.e., those fitted with a steam reservoir instead of a 
boiler which is charged fr an industrial plant. 

* 
* * 

The heading includes certain ocomotives of moderate power which are not equipped with 
bogies and are usually fitted w th only two driving axles. They are mainly used in stations for 
moving wagons and by industri 1 facilities connected with railways. 

( ) LOCOMOTIVE TENDERS 

Locomotive tenders are vehicle , coupled to steam locomotives, which carry the water and fuel 
required for the boiler. They c I nsist essentially of a frame carried on two or more axles and a 
sheet metal superstructure corn • I 'sing a closed tank for water and a coal bunker or fuel-oil tank. 

* 
* * 

Tractors constructed to travel on b• h road and rail are excluded (heading 87.01). 

XVII-8602-1 



• 86.03 

86.03 - Self-propelled railway or tramway coaches, vans and trucks, other than those of 
heading 86.04. 

8603.10 - Powered from an external source of electricity 

8603.90 - Other 

Self-propelled railway or tramway coaches, vans and trucks differ from locomotives because, in 
addition to being equipped with a power unit, they are also designed to carry passengers or 
freight. These vehicles may be designed to travel singly, or to be coupled to one or more 
vehicles of the same type, or to one or more trailer vehicles. 

The main feature of these vehicles is that they are fitted with a control cab either at one or both 
ends, or in a raised position (conning-tower) in the middle. 

The various types of self-propelled coaches, vans and trucks falling in the heading include : 

(A) Electrically-propelled coaches in which electrical energy is received from a stationary 

• external source, e.g., through a pantograph or trolley in the case of an overhead cable, or 
through collector shoes mounted on the bogies in the case of a third rail. 

Tramway coaches. These sometimes use two conductor rails placed in a slot rail and 
current is collected via a special device known as a "plough". 

(B) Rail-cars, i.e., self-contained vehicles running under their own power and equipped with 
diesel or other internal combustion engines, etc. 

Some rail-cars are fitted with solid or pneumatic tyres and others are of the rack-rail type. 

(C) Self-propelled vehicles functioning by means of storage batteries. 

This heading also includes electro-gyro rail vehicles. The principle of this system is based on 
the accumulation of kinetic energy in a fast revolving flywheel. This energy is then by means of 
an electric generator transmitted to a driving motor in the form of electric current. The scope of 
this system is rather limited, but it may be applied in light rail-cars or in trams. 
It should be noted that the heading excludes road motor-coaches convertible into rail-cars simply by 
changing the wheels and locking the steering, the motor remaining unchanged (heading 87.02). 

• 

• 
XVII-8603-1 



86.04 • 
86.04 - Railway or tramway aintenance or service vehicles, whether or not self-propelled 

(for example, worksh ps, cranes, ballast tampers, trackliners, testing coaches and 
track inspection vehic es). 

The vehicles covered by this h ading, whether or not self-propelled, are specially designed for 
use, e.g., in the installation, s rvicing and maintenance of the permanent way and structures 
alongside the track. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Workshop vans and truc s fitted with tools, machine-tools, electric generators, lifting 
machinery (jacks, hoists, e c.), welding equipment, chains, cables, etc. 

(2) Breakdown and other rane-vehicles; locomotive or coach lifting crane-vehicles; 
crane-vehicles for lifting or placing rails; crane-vehicles for loading and unloading at 
station platforms. 

(3)  Winch trucks. 

(4)  Trucks fitted with special quipment for cleaning or tamping ballast. 

(5)  Trucks fitted with machin for mixing cement for use on the track (for the foundations of 
electric cable pylons, etc.). 

(6)  Trucks for calibrating wei h-bridges. 

(7) Scaffold trucks for the ins llation and maintenance of electric cables. 

(8) Spraying vans for weed-kil ing. 

(9) Self-propelled vehicles for track maintenance (in particular, railway trackliners), equipped 
with one or more engines which not only power the working machines mounted thereon 
(track-setters, ballast tamp rs, etc.), and propel the vehicle while work is in progress but 
also enable it to travel rap dly along the track, as a self-propelled unit, when the working 
machines are not in operate an. 

(10) Railway testing coaches f tted with special equipment such as automatic instruments for 
checking the working of he engine, brakes, etc. (for example, for measuring the load 
hauled, detecting defects n the rails, track base, bridges, etc.); track checking coaches 
which record, whilst travel ing, any track irregularity. 

(11) Mechanically-propelled tr ck inspection trolleys, including motorised rail-cycles, used by 
the railway staff for track maintenance. They are usually fitted with internal combustion 
engines, are self-propelled and provide a rapid means of transport both for maintenance 
personnel and for materials to be carried or picked up along the track. 

(12) Non-mechanically-propell d track inspection trolleys, including rail-cycles, used by 
railway inspection staff (e. ., hand- or foot-propelled types). 

* 
* * 

When mounted on simple wheele platforms and not on true railway or tramway underframes (not 
constituting, therefore, true railway or tramway rolling-stock), machines, measuring instruments and other 
equipment, are excluded from thi heading and fall- in other more specific headings (headings 84.25, 
84.26, 84.28, 84.29, 84.30, etc.). 

XVII-8604-1 



• 86.05 

86.05 - Railway or tramway passenger coaches, not self-propelled; luggage vans, post office 
coaches and other special purpose railway or tramway coaches, not self-propelled 
(excluding those of heading 86.04). 

This heading covers a group of railway or tramway rolling-stock not self-propelled (including 
tramway trailer coaches and funicular (cable) railway coaches), of the type usually coupled into 
passenger trains. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Passenger coaches of all kinds, including sleeping cars, restaurant cars, saloon coaches, 
recreation coaches (specially fitted for entertainment, dancing, etc.). 

(2) Funicular (cable) railway coaches. 

(3) Tramway trailer coaches. 

(4) Special coaches for underground transportation of miners. 

• (5) Living coaches for railway staff. 

(6) Luggage vans and combined passenger-luggage coaches. 

(7) Travelling post office coaches. 

(8) Ambulance, hospital, X-ray or similar coaches. 

(9) Prison coaches. 

(10) Armoured coaches. 

(11) Coaches specially equipped with radio or telegraph apparatus. 

(12) Instruction coaches fitted with apparatus, machines or scale models (e.g., for instruction of 
the staff). 

(13) Exhibition coaches. 

• 

• 
XVII-8605-1 



86.06 • 
86.06 - Railway or tramway oods vans and wagons, not self-propelled. 

8606.10 - Tank wago s and the like 

8606.30 - Self-discha ging vans and wagons, other than those of subheading 8606.10 

- Other : 

8606.91 - - Covered a d closed 

8606.92 - - Open, wit non-removable sides of a height exceeding 60 cm 

8606.99 - - Other 

This heading covers vehicles s r the transport of goods on railway networks (of any gauge). It 
also covers small vehicles or • cks for the transport of goods by rail, in mines, on building 
sites, in factories, warehouses etc. These latter generally differ from true wagons, carriages, 
etc., in that they are not fitted ith springs. 

In addition to the usual open agons and trucks (flat trucks, tipping wagons, etc.) and covered 
vans, the heading includes the i • llowing specialised types : 

(1) Tank wagons and the like e.g., reservoir wagons, cask wagons). 

(2) Insulated or refrigerated v s and wagons. 

(3) Self-discharging vans and agons (tipping wagons, hopper wagons, etc.). 

(4) Underslung flat trucks for e transport of heavy goods. 

(5) Timber carrying trucks. 

(6) Reservoir wagons fitted w th stoneware, etc., reservoirs for the transport of chemicals. 

(7) Horse boxes. 

(8) Double deck wagons (e.g., for carrying cars). 

(9) Vans specially equipped f r the transport of live poultry or live fish. 

(10) Platform trucks for carryin other trucks. 

(11) Narrow gauge wagons of 1 kinds. 

(12) Mining wagons. 

(13) Trolleys for the transport o rails, girders, etc. 

(14) Trucks fitted with rails, fo carrying rail-road trailers. 

(15) Wagons and trucks special y designed for the transport of highly radioactive products. 

"Road-rail" trailers devised for transport by special trucks fitted with guide rails are excluded 
(heading 87.16). 

XVII-8606-1 



• 86.07 

86.07 - Parts of railway or tramway locomotives or rolling-stock. 

- Bogies, bissel-bogies, axles and wheels, and parts thereof : 

8607.11 - - Driving bogies and bissel-bogies 

8607.12 - - Other bogies and bissel-bogies 

8607.19 - - Other, including parts 

- Brakes and parts thereof : 

8607.21 - - Air brakes and parts thereof 

8607.29 - - Other 

8607.30 - Hooks and other coupling devices, buffers, and parts thereof 

• - Other : 

8607.91 - - Of locomotives 

8607.99 - - Other 

This heading covers parts of railway or tramway locomotives or rolling-stock, provided the 
parts fulfil both the following conditions : 

(i) They must be identifiable as being suitable for use solely or principally with the 
above-mentioned vehicles; 

(ii) They must not be excluded by the provisions of the Notes to Section XVII. 

Parts of railway or tramway locomotives or rolling-stock include : 

(1) Bogies, with two or more axles, and bissel-bogies consisting of a frame with only one axle. 

(2) Straight or cranked axles, whether or not assembled. 

(3) Wheels and parts thereof (wheel centres, metal tyres, etc.). 

(4) Axle-boxes, also known as lubricating or grease-boxes, and parts thereof (e.g., axle-box 
bodies). 

(5) All types of brake gear, including : 

• (a) Hand-brakes, controlled directly from each individual vehicle (lever and screw brakes). 

(b) Continuous brakes with a single control for all the vehicles of the train. These include 
compressed air and vacuum brakes. 

(c) Parts of brake gear including shoes, cylinders, levers, etc. 

(6) Buffers. 

• 
XVII-8607-1 



1 

86.07 

Coupling gear (e.g., hook screw or chain type, draft gears); some coupling devices may be 
automatic. 

Frames and parts thereo (longerons, cross-girders, axle-box guides, etc.); frames cast in 
one piece. 

Corridor connections and connecting platforms. 

Bodies (not mounted o underframes) for motorised or non-self-propelled railway or 
tramway rolling-stock (e. ., for coaches, trucks, wagons, etc.); parts of such bodies (e.g., 
coach or truck doors,pa itions, hinged sides of wagons, side stanchions, running boards, 
water tanks for tenders). 

(11) Pipes with coupling head for the braking or heating systems. 

(12) Hydraulic shock absorber for bogies. 
It should be noted, however, that angles, shapes, sections, sheets, plates and other parts of frames, and 
also tubes and pipes, etc., of base metal, remain classified in Section XV unless they have been worked 
to such an extent that they are cle ly identifiable as parts of locomotives or rolling-stock. 

XVII-8607-2 



• 86.08 

86.08 - Railway or tramway track fixtures and fittings; mechanical (including electro-
mechanical) signalling, safety or traffic control equipment for railways, tramways, 
roads, inland waterways, parking facilities, port installations or airfields; parts of 
the foregoing. 

(A) RAILWAY OR TRAMWAY TRACK FIXTURES AND FITTINGS 

This group includes : 

(1) Assembled track, i.e., rails already fixed to sleepers or other supports. Such track may be 
in the form of junction, switch or cross-over points, curves, straight runs, etc. 

(2) Turntables, whether or not electrically operated, i.e., large platforms usually circular, 
which can rotate about the centre, and which are fitted with railway or tramway tracks; 
most are also equipped with rollers carrying the perimeter of the platform. 

• Locomotives, etc., can therefore be rotated on the turntable and driven off in a new 
direction. The heading also includes hand-operated turntables, for narrow gauge railways 
on building sites, quarries, etc. 
However, the heading excludes locomotives or wagon traversers which transfer railway vehicles 
from one track to another. These and other machines for handling rolling-stock (e.g., wagon tippers, 
wagon pushers) fall in heading 84.28. 

(3) Platform buffers, i.e., hydraulic or spring-loaded stopping devices placed at the end of 
each run of track to minimise the shock if rolling-stock does not stop before reaching the 
track terminal. They are designed either to be embedded into the masonry (e.g., of terminal 
stations) or into robust frameworks (e.g., in shunting yards). 

(4) Loading gauges, i.e., arch-shaped structures which ensure that trains passing beneath them 
do not exceed the maximum clearance height and width prescribed for the route involved. 

The heading does not cover wooden sleepers (heading 44.06), concrete sleepers (heading 68.10) or 
sleepers, rails or other items of unassembled track construction material, of iron or steel specified in 
heading 73.02 (see the corresponding Explanatory Note). 

Pylons and portals for carrying overhead cables are not regarded as railway or tramway fixtures or fittings 
and are classified according to their constituent materials in headings 68.10, 73.08, etc. 

• (B) MECHANICAL (INCLUDING ELECTRO-MECHANICAL) SIGNALLING, 
SAFETY OR TRAFFIC CONTROL EQUIPMENT FOR RAILWAYS, 

TRAMWAYS, ROADS, INLAND WATERWAYS, PARKING FACILITIES, 
PORT INSTALLATIONS OR AIRFIELDS 

This group covers essentially apparatus in which the signal, etc., is operated from a control 
point, generally at some distance, by the movement of levers, cranks, rods, wires, chains, etc., or 
by hydro-pneumatic devices or electric motors. Electropneumatically operated equipment (e.g., 
for railways) is also classified in this heading. In this type, the signals or points are activated by 
a pneumatic power engine, the admission or release of air into or from the motor cylinder being 
controlled by an electro-magnetic valve which is in turn controlled by the electric control board 
in the signal box. The signal and its pneumatic activating device is regarded as mechanical 
equipment of this heading, but the electric control board, etc., is proper to Chapter 85. 

• 
XVII-8608-1 



86.08 • 
The term "signalling equipme t" refers to apparatus which can be made to show two or more 
aspects each conveying instru tions to vehicles, ships or aircraft. It does not cover road, rail, 
etc., sign-plates with no mech ical features (e.g., speed limit, direction or gradient sign-plates); 
these are classified according t the constituent material (e.g., in heading 44.21 or 83.10). 

Provided they are mechanic lly or electro-mechanically operated as described above, the 
following types of apparatus f. 1 1 in this group : 

(1) Signal box equipment. complete unit consists of a number of control levers with their 
transmission wheels, rod wires, etc., mounted in a frame. In most cases interlocking 
devices are incorporated t prevent signals or points being set in a conflicting manner. 

(2) Signal arms, signal discs complete signal posts or signal gantries. 

(3)  Controlling or slotting 1 ver mechanisms fitted to interdependent signals to ensure their 
co-ordinated action. 

(4) Trackside mechanisms ( ;round frames, etc., of the lever, pedal, crank or other types) for 
operating points, signals, tc. 

(5)  Point detectors. These re activated by the movement of the points themselves; their 
movements are transmitt d back to the signal box so that the signalman knows that the 
points are in the position e intends. 

(6)  Point locks and locking bars. These devices, fitted to the track itself, ensure that the 
passage of a train automa ically locks the points, so that they cannot be changed from the 
signal box until the train i clear. 

(7)  Railbrakes. These devic s are used to slow down or stop rolling-stock (e.g., to slow 
shunted wagons entering a marshalling yard siding). They usually consist essentially of a 
pair of bars fitted to each rail of the track; under hydraulic or compressed air control, these 
bars can be made to exert braking pressure on the wheels of rolling-stock passing over the 
track. 

(8)  Derailers and stop block . When slid free of the rail, these allow the passage of a wagon, 
but when slid on to the ru r fling surface of the rail they act as a stop block or as a deflecting 
blade to "jump" a wagon ff the track. 

(9)  Train stops. These usuall consist of a T shaped bar device fixed alongside the track and 
operated by compressed ir. The bar is interconnected with the signal so that when the 
latter is at danger, the bar s raised to a position where it will "trip" a brake control lever on 
any train overrunning the ignal. 

(10) Automatic fog-signalling apparatus. These devices, also usually pneumatically operated, 
automatically place a fog s'gnal on the track each time the signal is at danger. 

(11) Level crossing control ge= r for raising and lowering, or opening and closing the gates. 
This gear usually consist of a hand-operated crank wheel and gearing device, or of a 
leverage system operated om the signal box as with signal or point control gear. 

Level crossing gates the selves are classified according to their constituent material 
(heading 73.08 if made of iron or steel, or heading 44.21 if made of wood), but 
mechanically or electro- echanically operated signals indicating whether the gates are 
open or shut fall in this he ding. 

XVII-8608-2 



• 86.08 

(12) Hand- or electro-mechanically operated signals designed to show "Stop" and "Go" signs 
to road or maritime traffic. 

PARTS 

The heading also includes identifiable parts of the apparatus referred to above (e.g., turntable 
platforms, signal arms and discs, control levers, point lock cases, interlocking slot mechanisms). 

* 
* * 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Chains and other parts of general use as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal 
(Section XV), and similar goods of plastics (Chapter 39); general purpose material (such as wire 
and rodding) and metal structures and metal parts of such structures, falling in Section XV. It should 
be noted that point rods which run beneath the rails to connect the trackside control mechanism to the 
switch blades fall in heading 73.02 together with certain other specified railway or tramway track 
construction material of iron or steel. 

• (b) Signal lamps (heading 85.30 or 94.05). 

(c) Sirens, fog horns and other sound signalling instruments (classified in their own appropriate 
headings). 

(d) Apparatus for signalling on board vehicles, ships, etc., (e.g., alarm signalling apparatus on trains, 
emergency station signalling apparatus for ships, etc.) (classified in their own appropriate headings). 

• 

• 
XVII-8608-3 



86.09 • 
86.09 - Containers (includingcontainers for the transport of fluids) specially designed and 

equipped for carriagby one or modes of transport. 

These containers (including li vans) are packing receptacles specially designed and equipped 
for carriage by one or more m des of transport (e.g., road, rail, water or air). They are equipped 
with fittings (hooks, rings, c stors, supports, etc.) to facilitate handling and securing on the 
transporting vehicle, aircraft o vessel. They are thus suitable for the "door-to-door" transport of 
goods without intermediate re acking and, being of robust construction, are intended to be used 
repeatedly. 

The more usual type, which ay be of wood or metal, consists of a large box equipped with 
doors, or with removable sides 

The principal types of container include : 

(1) Furniture removal contain rs. 

(2) Insulated containers for perishable foods or goods. 

(3) Containers (generally cyli drical) for the transport of liquids or gases. These containers fall 
in this heading only if the incorporate a support enabling them to be fitted to any type of 
transporting vehicle or ve sel; otherwise they are classified according to their constituent 
material. 

(4) Open containers for bulk transport of coal, ores, paving blocks, bricks, tiles, etc. These 
often have hinged bottoms or sides to facilitate unloading. 

(5)  Special types for particular goods, especially for fragile goods such as glassware, ceramics, 
etc., or for live animals. 

Containers usually vary in size from 4 to 145 m3 capacity. Certain types are however smaller, 
but their capacity is not normal y less than 1 m3. 
The heading excludes : 

(a) Cases, crates, etc., which tho :h designed for the "door-to-door" transport of goods are not specially 
constructed as described abo to be secured to the transporting vehicle, aircraft or vessel; these are 
classified according to their c nstituent material. 

(b) Road-rail trailers (intended ainly for use as road trailers, but so designed that they may be 
transported on special railway wagons fitted with guide rails) (heading 87.16). 

XVII-8609-1 



• 87 

Chapter 87 

Vehicles other than railway or tramway rolling-stock, 
and parts and accessories thereof 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover railway or tramway rolling-stock designed solely for running on rails. 

2.- For the purposes of this Chapter, "tractors" means vehicles constructed essentially for hauling or 
pushing another vehicle, appliance or load, whether or not they contain subsidiary provision for the 
transport, in connection with the main use of the tractor, of tools, seeds, fertilisers or other goods. 

Machines and working tools designed for fitting to tractors of heading 87.01 as interchangeable 
equipment remain classified in their respective headings even if presented with the tractor, and 
whether or not mounted on it. 

3.- Motor chassis fitted with cabs fall in headings 87.02 to 87.04, and not in heading 87.06. 

• 4.- Heading 87.12 includes all children's bicycles. Other children's cycles fall in heading 95.03. 

GENERAL 

This Chapter covers the following vehicles, with the exception of certain mobile machines of 
Section XVI (see the Explanatory Notes to headings 87.01, 87.05 and 87.16) : 

(1) Tractors (heading 87.01). 

(2) Motor vehicles designed for the transport of persons (heading 87.02 or 87.03) or goods 
(heading 87.04) or for special purposes (heading 87.05). 

(3) Works trucks, self-propelled, not fitted with lifting or handling equipment, of the type used 
in factories, warehouses, dock areas or airports for short distance transport of goods, and 
tractors of the type used on railway station platforms (heading 87.09). 

(4) Armoured fighting vehicles, motorised (heading 87.10). 

(5) Motorcycles and side-cars; cycles and carriages for disabled persons, whether or not 
motorised (headings 87.11 to 87.13). 

(6) Baby carriages (heading 87.15). 

(7) Trailers and semi-trailers, and other vehicles, not mechanically propelled, i.e., vehicles for 
towing by another vehicle, pushing or pulling by hand or drawing by animals 
(heading 87.16). 

The Chapter also covers air-cushion vehicles designed to travel over land or over both land and 
certain tracts of water (swamps, etc.) (see Note 5 to Section XVII). 

The classification of a motor vehicle is not affected by operations which are carried out after 
assembling all parts into a complete motor vehicle, such as : vehicle identification number 
fixation, brake system charging and bleeding air from brakes, charging of the steering booster 
system (power steering) and cooling and conditioning systems, headlights regulation, wheel 
geometry regulation (alignment) and regulation of brakes. This includes classification by the 
application of General Interpretative Rule 2 (a). 

• 
XVII-87-1 



87 • 
An incomplete or unfinish d vehicle, whether or not assembled, is classified as the 
corresponding complete or fin 'shed vehicle provided it has the essential character of the latter 
(see General Interpretative Ru l 2 (a)), as for example : 

(A) A motor vehicle, not yet tted with the wheels or tyres and battery. 

(B) A motor vehicle not equi. ed with its engine or with its interior fittings. 

(C) A bicycle without saddle nd tyres. 

This Chapter also covers part s and accessories which are identifiable as being suitable for use 
solely or principally with the vehicles included therein, subject to the provisions of the Notes 
to Section XVII (see the Gene 1 Explanatory Note to the Section). 

* * 

It should be noted that amp ] ibious motor vehicles are classified as motor vehicles of this 
Chapter. But aircraft specially constructed so that they can also be used as road vehicles remain 
classified as aircraft (heading 8.02). 

The Chapter also excludes : 

(a) Vehicles and parts thereof, • oss-sectioned, designed for demonstrational purposes, unsuitable for 
other uses (heading 90.23). 

(b) Wheeled toys designed to be *dden by children, and children's cycles (other than children's bicycles) 
(heading 95.03). 

(c) Winter sports equipment such as bobsleighs, toboggans and the like (heading 95.06). 

(d) Vehicles used on roundabouts or in other fairground amusements (heading 95.08). 

XVII-87-2 



87.01 

87.01 - Tractors (other than tractors of heading 87.09) (+). 

8701.10 - Single axle tractors 

8701.20 - Road tractors for semi-trailers 

8701.30 - Track-laying tractors 

- Other, of an engine power : 

8701.91 - - Not exceeding 18 kW 

8701.92 - - Exceeding 18 kW but not exceeding 37 kW 

8701.93 - - Exceeding 37 kW but not exceeding 75 kW 

8701.94 - - Exceeding 75 kW but not exceeding 130 kW 

8701.95 - - Exceeding 130 kW 

For the purposes of this heading, tractors means wheeled or track-laying vehicles constructed 
essentially for hauling or pushing another vehicle, appliance or load. They may contain 
subsidiary provision for the transport, in connection with the main use of the tractor, of tools, 
seeds, fertilisers or other goods, or provision for fitting with working tools as a subsidiary 
function. 

The heading does not cover propelling bases specially designed, constructed or reinforced to form an 
integral part of a machine performing a function such as lifting, excavating, levelling, etc., even if the 
propelling base uses traction or propulsion for the execution of this function. 

The heading covers tractors (other than tractors of the type used on railway station platforms, 
falling in heading 87.09) of various types (tractors for agricultural or forestry work, road 
tractors, heavy duty tractors for constructional engineering work, winch tractors, etc.), whatever 
their mode of propulsion (internal combustion piston engine, electric motor, etc.). It also 
includes tractors which can be used both on rails and on road, but not those which are designed 
exclusively for use on rails. 

The tractors of this heading may be fitted with coachwork (a body) or may have seats for the 
crew or a driving cab. They may be equipped with a tool box, with provision for raising and 
lowering agricultural implements, with a coupling device for trailers or semi-trailers (e.g., on 
mechanical horses and similar tractive units), or with a power take-off for driving machines 
such as threshers and circular saws. 

The chassis of a tractor may be mounted on wheels, on tracks or on a combination of wheels 
and tracks. In the last case, only the front steering axle is fitted with wheels. 

This heading also covers pedestrian controlled tractors. These are small agricultural tractors 
equipped with a single driving axle carried on one or two wheels; like normal tractors, they are 
designed for use with interchangeable implements which they may operate by means of a 
general purpose power take-off. They are not usually fitted with a seat and the steering is 
effected by means of two handles. Some types, however, also have a one- or two-wheeled rear 
carriage with a seat for the driver. 

Similar pedestrian controlled tractors are also used for industrial purposes. 

The heading includes tractors fitted with winches (e.g., as used for hauling out bogged-down 
vehicles; for up-rooting and hauling trees; or for the remote haulage of agricultural implements). 

The heading further includes straddle-type tractors (stilt tractors) used, for example, in 
vineyards and forestry plantations. 

XVII-8701-1 



87.01 • 
The heading also excludes moto breakdown lorries equipped with cranes, lifting tackle, winches, etc. 
(heading 87.05). 

TRACTOR FITTED WITH OTHER MACHINERY 

It should be noted that agricultural machines designed for fitting to tractors as interchangeable 
equipment (ploughs, harrows, hoes, etc.) remain classified in their respective headings even if 
mounted on the tractor at the 'me of presentation. The tractive unit in such cases is separately 
classified in this heading. 

Tractors and industrial workin tools are also classified separately when the tractor is designed 
essentially for hauling or push ng another vehicle or load, and includes, in the same way as an 
agricultural tractor, simple de ices for operating (raising, lowering, etc.) the working tools. In 
such a case, the interchangea le working tools are classified in their appropriate headings, 
even if presented with the tractor, and whether or not mounted on it, while the tractor with its 
operating equipment is classifi d in this heading. 

In the case of articulated moto lorries with semi-trailers, tractors coupled to semi-trailers, and 
heavy duty tractors coupled, 'n the same way as to semi-trailers, to working machines of 
Chapter 84, the hauling element is classified in this heading whereas the semi-trailer or the 
working machine is classified i its appropriate heading. 

On the other hand, this heading d e es not cover the propelling bases of machines referred to, for example, 
in headings 84.25, 84.26, 84.29, 8 1.30 and 84.32, in which the propelling base, the operating controls, the 
working tools and their actuating quipment are specially designed for fitting together to form an integral 
mechanical unit. Such is the case nth loaders, bulldozers, motorised ploughs, etc. 

As a general rule, propelling bases forming an integral part of a machine designed for handling, 
excavating, etc., can be distinguished from the tractors of this heading by their special 
constructional features (shape, chassis, means of locomotion, etc.). For propelling bases of the 
tractor type, various technical eatures relating essentially to the structure of the complete unit 
and to equipment specially designed for functions other than hauling or pushing should be taken 
into consideration. For instanc , the propelling bases not covered by this heading incorporate 
robust elements such as supp rting blocks, plates or beams, platforms for swivelling cranes) 
forming a part of or fixed, ge erally by welding, to the chassis-body framework to carry the 
actuating equipment for the	rking tools. In addition, such propelling bases may comprise 
several of the following typic parts : powerful equipment with built-in hydraulic system for 
operating the working tools; sp cial gear boxes, in which, for example, the top speed in reverse 
gear is not less than the top peed in forward gear; hydraulic clutch and torque converter; 
balancing counterweight; long r tracks to increase stability of the base; special frame for rear 
mounted engine, etc. 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Notes. 

Subheading 8701.10 

See the Explanatory Note to heading 87.01, sixth and seventh paragraphs. 

XVII-8701-2 



• 87.01 

Subheading 8701.20 

For the purposes of this subheading, the expression "road tractors" refers to motor vehicles which are 
designed to haul semi-trailers over long distances. The road tractor and semi-trailer form a combination 
known by various names (e.g., "articulated lorries", "tractor-trailers", etc.). These vehicles usually contain 
diesel engines and may be driven at speeds in excess of urban traffic speeds on the road network (i.e., 
streets in the general sense, including avenues, boulevards and motorways) with fully loaded trailers. 
Such vehicles have a closed cab for the driver and passengers (sometimes with sleeping facilities), 
headlamps and dimensions authorized domestically, and are usually equipped with a fifth wheel coupling 
allowing rapid shift between semi-trailers performing different functions. 

Similar vehicles used to haul semi-trailers over short distances are excluded from this subheading 
(generally subheading 8701.90). 

Subheading 8701.30 

This subheading also covers tractors with a combination of wheels and tracks. 

Subheading 8701.90 

• This subheading includes vehicles used to haul semi-trailers over short distances. These types of vehicles 
are known by various names (e.g., "terminal tractors", "port tractors", etc.) and they are intended to 
position or shuttle trailers within a defined area. They are not suitable for long-haul road use for which 
road tractors of subheading 8701.20 are designed. They are distinguishable from road tractors in that they 
are usually equipped with diesel engines with a maximum speed normally not exceeding 50 km/h and are 
generally equipped with a small, single-seat enclosed cab for the driver only. 

• 

• 
XVII-8701-3 



87.02 • 
87.02 - Motor vehicles for th transport of ten or more persons, including the driver. 

8702.10 - With only ompression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or 
semi-diesel 

8702.20 - With both ompression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or 
semi-diesel and electric motor as motors for propulsion 

8702.30 - With both spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating piston engine 
and electric motor as motors for propulsion 

8702.40 - With only lectric motor for propulsion 

8702.90 - Other 

This heading covers all mot r vehicles designed for the transport of ten persons or more 
(including the driver). 

This heading includes motor b ses, coaches, trolleybuses and gyrobuses. 

The vehicles of this heading iay have any type of motor (internal combustion piston engine, 
electric motor, combination o an internal combustion piston engine and one or more electric 
motors, etc.). 

Vehicles, which have the corn mation of an internal combustion piston engine and one or more 
electric motors, are known is "Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs)". For the purpose of 
mechanical propulsion, these vehicles draw energy from both a consumable fuel and an 
electrical energy/power s orage device (e.g., electric accumulator, capacitor, 
flywheel/generator). There are various types of Hybnd Electric Vehicles (HEVs), which can be 
differentiated by their powertr in configuration (such as, parallel hybrids, series hybrids, power-
split or series-parallel hybrids) and degree of hybridization (i.e., full hybrids, mild hybrids and 
plug-in hybrids). 

Electric vehicles are propelled y an electric motor or motors powered by electric accumulator 
packs. 

Trolleybuses obtain current fro overhead wires and "gyrobuses" operate on the principle that 
kinetic energy can be stored i a high-speed flywheel and used to drive an electric generator 
which supplies current to a mot r. 

This heading also includes mot r coaches convertible into rail-cars by changing the wheels and 
locking the steering, the motor emaining unchanged. 

XV11-8702-1 



• 87.03 

87.03 - Motor cars and other motor vehicles principally designed for the transport of 
persons (other than those of heading 87.02), including station wagons and racing 
cars. 

8703.10 - Vehicles specially designed for travelling on snow; golf cars and similar 
vehicles 

- Other vehicles, with only spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating 
piston engine : 

8703.21 - - Of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 1,000 cc 

8703.22 - - Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,000 cc but not exceeding 1,500 cc 

8703.23 - - Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,500 cc but not exceeding 3,000 cc 

8703.24 - - Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 3,000 cc 

• - Other vehicles, with only compression-ignition internal combustion piston 
engine (diesel or semi-diesel) : 

8703.31 - - Of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 1,500 cc 

8703.32 - - Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,500 cc but not exceeding 2,500 cc 

8703.33 - - Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 2,500 cc 

8703.40 - Other vehicles, with both spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating 
piston engine and electric motor as motors forpropulsion, other than those 
capable of being charged by plugging to external source of electric power 

8703.50 - Other vehicles, with both compression-ignition internal combustion piston 
engine (diesel or semi-diesel) and electric motor as motors for propulsion, 
other than those capable of being charged by plugging to external source of 
electric power 

8703.60 - Other vehicles, with both spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating 
piston engine and electric motor as motors for propulsion, capable of being 
charged by plugging to external source of electric power 

• 8703.70 - Other vehicles, with both compression-ignition internal combustion piston 
engine (diesel or semi-diesel) and electric motor as motors for propulsion, 
capable of being charged by plugging to external source of electric power 

8703.80 - Other vehicles, with only electric motor for propulsion 

8703.90 - Other 

This heading covers motor vehicles of various types (including amphibious motor vehicles) 
designed for the transport of persons; it does not, however, cover the motor vehicles of 
heading 87.02. The vehicles of this heading may have any type of motor (internal combustion 
piston engine, electric motor, gas turbine, combination of an internal combustion piston engine 
and one or more electric motors, etc.). 

The heading includes : 

(1) Vehicles specially designed for travelling on snow; golf cars and similar vehicles. 

(a) Vehicles specially designed for travelling on snow (e.g., snowmobiles). 

• 
XVII-8703-1 



87.03 • 
(b) Golf cars and simila vehicles. 

(2) Other vehicles. 

(a) Motor cars (e.g., lim usines, taxis, sports cars and racing cars). 

(b) Specialised transport vehicles such as ambulances, prison vans and hearses. 

(c) Motor-homes (camp rs, etc.), vehicles for the transport of persons, specially equipped 
for habitation (with sl eping, cooking, toilet facilities, etc.). 

(d) Four-wheeled moto vehicles with tube chassis, having a motor-car type steering 
system (e.g., a steerin system based on the Ackerman principle). 

For the purposes of this he ing, the expression "station wagons" means vehicles with a 
maximum seating capacity of ine persons (including the driver), the interior of which may be 
used, without structural alteraf on, for the transport of both persons and goods. 

The classification of certain otor vehicles in this heading is determined by certain features 
which indicate that the vehicle are principally designed for the transport of persons rather than 
for the transport of goods (hea ing 87.04). These features are especially helpful in determining 
the classification of motor ve ides which generally have a gross vehicle weight rating of less 
than 5 tonnes and which have single enclosed interior space comprising an area for the driver 
and passengers and another ars a that may be used for the transport of both persons and goods. 
Included in this category of otor vehicles are those commonly known as "multipurpose" 
vehicles (e.g., van-type vehic es, sports utility vehicles, certain pick-up type vehicles). The 
following features are indica ive of the design characteristics generally applicable to the 
vehicles which fall in this head g : 

(a) Presence of permanent se is with safety equipment (e.g., safety seat belts or anchor points 
and fittings for installing afety seat belts) for each person or the presence of permanent 
anchor points and fittings for installing seats and safety equipment in the rear area behind 
the area for the driver and front passengers; such seats may be fixed, fold-away, removable 
from anchor points or coil psible; 

(b)  Presence of rear windows long the two side panels; 

(c)  Presence of sliding, swing out or lift-up door or doors, with windows, on the side panels or 
in the rear; 

(d) Absence of a permanent panel or barrier between the area for the driver and front 
passengers and the rear ar a that may be used for the transport of both persons and goods; 

(e) Presence of comfort featu es and interior finish and fittings throughout the vehicle interior 
that are associated with t e passenger areas of vehicles (e.g., floor carpeting, ventilation, 
interior lighting, ashtrays). 

The heading also covers lightw ight three-wheeled vehicles such as : 

those fitted with motorcy le engine and wheels, etc. which, by virtue of their mechanical 
structure, possess the cha acteristics of conventional motor cars, that is motor car type 
steering system or both re erse gear and differential; 

those mounted on a T-sha ed chassis, whose two rear wheels are independently driven by 
separate electric accumu ator-powered electric motors. These vehicles are normally 
operated by means of a single central control stick with which the driver can start, 
accelerate, brake, stop and everse the vehicle, as well as steer it to the right or to the left by 
applying a differential torq e to the drive wheels or by turning the front wheel. 

XVII-8703-2 



• 87.03 

Three-wheeled vehicles of the above-described character are classified under heading 87.04 if they are 
designed for the transport of goods. 

The vehicles of this heading may be of the wheeled or track-laying type. 

Vehicles, which have the combination of an internal combustion piston engine and one or more 
electric motors, are known as "Hybrid Electric Vehicles (HEVs)". For the purpose of 
mechanical propulsion, these vehicles draw energy from both a consumable fuel and an 
electrical energy/power storage device (e.g., electric accumulator, capacitor, 
flywheel/generator). There are various types of Hybnd Electric Vehicles (HEVs), which can be 
differentiated by their powertrain configuration (such as, parallel hybrids, series hybrids, power-
split or series-parallel hybrids) and degree of hybridization (i.e., full hybrids, mild hybrids and 
plug-in hybrids). 

Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs) are those which can recharge their electric 
accumulators by plugging them into an electrical power grid outlet or charging station. 

Vehicles propelled by one or more electric motors powered by electric accumulator packs are 
known as "Electric Vehicles (EVs)". 

411	Vehicles specialised for use in fairgrounds, e.g., "dodge'em" cars are classified in heading 95.08. 

• 

• 

XVII-8703-3 



87.04 • 
87.04 - Motor vehicles for th transport of goods (+). 

8704.10 - Dumpers d signed for off-highway use 

- Other, wit compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel 
or semi-diesel) : 

8704.21 - - g.v.w. no exceeding 5 tonnes 

8704.22 - - g.v.w. ex eeding 5 tonnes but not exceeding 20 tonnes 

8704.23 - - g.v.w. exceeding 20 tonnes 

- Other, with spark-ignition internal combustion piston engine : 

8704.31 - - g.v.w. not exceeding 5 tonnes 

8704.32 - - g.v.w. ex.- eding 5 tonnes 

8704.90 - Other 

This heading covers in particul r: 

Ordinary lorries (trucks) and v . s (flat, to aulin-covered, closed, etc.); delivery trucks and vans 
of all kinds, removal vans; to ies (trucks with automatic discharging devices (tipping lorries 
(trucks), etc.); tankers (wheth r or notfitted with pumps); refrigerated or insulated lorries 
(trucks); multi-floored lorries nicks) for the transport of acid in carboys, cylinders of butane, 
etc.; dropframe heavy-duty to es (trucks) with loading ramps for the transport of tanks, lifting 
or excavating machinery, elect ical transformers, etc.; lorries (trucks) specially constructed for 
the transport of fresh concret e , other than concrete-mixer lorries (trucks) of heading 87.05; 
refuse collectors whether or no t fitted with loading, compressing, damping, etc., devices. 

The heading also covers lightw ight three-wheeled vehicles, such as : 

those fitted with motorcy le engine and wheels, etc. which, by virtue of their mechanical 
structure, possess the ch i actenstics of conventional motor cars, that is motor car type 
steering system or both re erse gear and differential; 

those mounted on a T-sha ed chassis, whose two rear wheels are independently driven by 
separate battery-powered lectric motors. These vehicles are normally operated by means 
of a single central control stick with which the driver can start, accelerate, brake, stop and 
reverse the vehicle, as we 1 as steer it to the right or to the left by applying a differential 
torque to the drive wheels r by turning the front wheel. 

Three-wheeled vehicles of the a ove-described character are classified in heading 87.03 if they are 
designed for the transport of perso s. 

XVII-8704-1 



• 87.04 

The classification of certain motor vehicles in this heading is determined by certain features 
which indicate that the vehicles are designed for the transport of goods rather than for the 
transport of persons (heading 87.03). These features are especially helpful in determining the 
classification of motor vehicles, generally vehicles having a gross vehicle weight rating of less 
than 5 tonnes, which have either a separate closed rear area or an open rear platform normally 
used for the transport of goods, but may have rear bench-type seats that are without safety seat 
belts, anchor points or passenger amenities and that fold flat against the sides to permit full use 
of the rear platform for the transport of goods. Included in this category of motor vehicles are 
those commonly known as "multipurpose" vehicles (e.g., van-type vehicles, pick-up type 
vehicles and certain sports utility vehicles). The following features are indicative of the design 
characteristics generally applicable to the vehicles which fall in this heading : 

(a) Presence of bench-type seats without safety equipment (e.g., safety seat belts or anchor 
points and fittings for installing safety seat belts) or passenger amenities in the rear area 
behind the area for the driver and front passengers. Such seats are normally fold-away or 
collapsible to allow full use of the rear floor (van-type vehicles) or a separate platform 
(pick-up vehicles) for the transport of goods; 

• (b) Presence of a separate cabin for the driver and passengers and a separate open platform 
with side panels and a drop-down tailgate (pick-up vehicles); 

(c) Absence of rear windows along the two side panels; presence of sliding, swing-out or lift-
up door or doors, without windows, on the side panels or in the rear for loading and 
unloading goods (van-type vehicles); 

(d) Presence of a permanent panel or barrier between the area for the driver and front 
passengers and the rear area; 

(e) Absence of comfort features and interior finish and fittings in the cargo bed area which are 
associated with the passenger areas of vehicles (e.g., floor carpeting, ventilation, interior 
lighting, ashtrays). 

This heading also covers : 

(1) Dumpers, sturdily built vehicles with a tipping or bottom opening body, designed for the 
transport of excavated or other materials. These vehicles, which may have a rigid or 
articulated chassis, are generally fitted with off-the-road wheels and can work over soft 
ground. Both heavy and light dumpers are included in this group; the latter are sometimes 
characterised by a two-way seat, two seats facing in opposite directions or by two steering 
wheels, to enable the vehicles to be steered with the dnver facing the body for unloading. 

(2) Shuttle cars. These vehicles are used in mines to transport coal or ore from the hewing 
machinery to the conveyor belts. They are heavy, underslung vehicles, equipped with tyres 
and fitted with internal combustion piston engines or electric motors; they unload 
automatically by means of a conveyor belt which forms the floor of the vehicle. 

(3)  Self-loading vehicles equipped with winches, elevating devices, etc., but designed 
essentially for transport purposes. 

(4) Road-rail lorries (trucks) specially equipped to travel both by road and rail. These 
vehicles, the road-wheels of which rest on the railway track, are fitted at the front and rear 
with a bogie-type device which can be raised by means of a jack to allow the vehicle to 
travel by road. 

• 
XVII-8704-2 



87.04 

Motor vehicle chassis, fitted ith an engine and cab, are also classified here. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Straddle carriers used in fac ries, warehouses, dock areas or airports, etc., for the handling of long 
loads or containers (heading 4.26). 

(b) Loader-transporters used in Ines (heading 84.29). 

(c) Motorcycles, motor-scooter or motorized cycles equipped for the transport of goods, such as 
delivery motorcycles, tricycl s, etc., which do not have the characteristics of three-wheeled vehicles 
of this heading (heading 87. 1). 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Notes. 

Subheading 8704.10 

These dumpers can generally distinguished from other vehicles for the transport of goods (in 
particular, tipping lomes (trucks) by the following characteristics : 

- the dumper body is made of ery strong steel sheets; its front part is extended over the driver's cab to 
protect the cab; the whole or art of the floor slopes upwards towards the rear; 

in some cases the driver's ca is half-width only; 

- lack of axle suspension; 

high braking capacity; 

limited speed and area of ope tion; 

special earth-moving tyres; 

because of their sturdy construction the tare weight/payload ratio does not exceed 1 : 1.6; 

the body may be heated by e aust gases to prevent materials from sticking or freezing. 

It should be noted, however, that ertain dumpers are specially designed for working in mines or tunnels, 
for example, those with a bottom- pening body. These have some of the characteristics mentioned above, 
but do not have a cab or an extend d protective front part of the body. 

Subheadings 8704.21, 8704.22, 8 04.23, 8704.31 and 8704.32 

The g.v.w. (gross vehicle weight) s the road weight specified by the manufacturer as being the maximum 
design weight capacity of the veh cle. This weight is the combined weight of the vehicle, the maximum 
specified load, the driver and a tan full of fuel. 

XVII-8704-3 



87.05 

87.05 - Special purpose motor vehicles, other than those principally designed for the 
transport of persons or goods (for example, breakdown lorries, crane lorries, fire 
fighting vehicles, concrete-mixer lorries, road sweeper lorries, spraying lorries, 
mobile workshops, mobile radiological units) (+). 

8705.10 - Crane lorries 

8705.20 - Mobile drilling derricks 

8705.30 - Fire fighting vehicles 

8705.40 - Concrete-mixer lorries 

8705.90 - Other 

This heading covers a range of motor vehicles, specially constructed or adapted, equipped with 
various devices that enable them to perform certain non-transport functions, i.e., the primary 
purpose of a vehicle of this heading is not the transport of persons or goods. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Motor breakdown lorries (trucks) consisting of a lorry (truck) chassis, with or without a 
floor, equipped with lifting gear such as non-rotating cranes, trestles, pulleys or winches, 
designed for lifting and towing broken-down vehicles. 

(2) Motor pump vehicles, with a pump usually driven by the vehicle's engine (e.g., fire 
fighting vehicles). 

(3) Lorries (trucks) fitted with ladders or elevator platforms for the maintenance of overhead 
cables, street lighting, etc.; lorries (trucks) with an adjustable arm and platform ("dollies") 
for cinematographic or television work. 

(4) Lorries (trucks) used for cleansing streets, gutters, airfield runways, etc., (e.g., sweepers, 
sprinklers, sprinklersweepers and cesspool emptiers). 

(5) Snow-ploughs and snow-blowers, with built-in equipment; i.e., vehicles constructed 
solely for snow clearance, and usually equipped with turbines, rotating blades, etc., driven 
either by the vehicle engine or by a separate engine. 

Interchangeable snow-plough or snow-blower equipment of all types is in all cases excluded 
(heading 84.30), whether or not presented mounted on a vehicle. 

(6) Spraying lorries (trucks) of all kinds, whether or not fitted with heating equipment, for 
spreading tar or gravel, for agricultural use, etc. 

(7)  Crane lorries (trucks), not for the transport of goods, consisting of a motor vehicle chassis 
on which a cab and a rotating crane are permanently mounted. However, lorries (trucks) 
with self-loading devices are excluded (heading 87.04). 

(8)  Mobile drilling derricks (i.e., lorries (trucks) fitted with a derrick assembly, winches and 
other appliances for drilling, etc.). 

XVII-8705-1 



87.05 • 
(9) Lorries (trucks) fitted wi h stacking mechanisms (i.e., with aplatform which moves on a 

vertical support and is ge erally powered by the vehicle engine). But the heading excludes 
self-loading motor vehicl s equipped with winches, elevating devices, etc., but which are 
constructed essentially fo the transport of goods (heading 87.04). 

(10) Concrete-mixer lorries (t cks) consisting of a cab and a motor vehicle chassis, on which is 
permanently mounted a oncrete-mixer, capable of use for both making and transporting 
concrete. 

(11) Mobile electric generator sets, consisting of a motor lorry (truck) on which is mounted an 
electric generator driven zither by the vehicle engine or by a separate motor. 

(12) Mobile radiological units (e.g., fitted with an examination room, dark room and complete 
radiological equipment). 

(13) Mobile clinics (medical o dental) with operating theatre, anaesthetic equipment and other 
surgical apparatus. 

(14) Searchlight lorries (truck , consisting of a searchlight mounted on a vehicle, with current 
usually supplied by a generator driven by the vehicle motor. 

(15) Outside broadcast vans. • 
(16) Telegraphy, radio-telegra t by or radio-telephony transmitting and receiving vans; radar 

vehicles. 

(17) "Tote" vans, fitted with c.1 culating machines for automatic calculation of wins and odds on 
racecourses. 

(18) Mobile laboratories (e.g., or checking the performance of agricultural machinery). 

(19) Test lorries (trucks), fitted with recording instruments for determining the tractive power of 
motor vehicles towing the 

(20) Mobile bakeries fully equi ped (kneader, oven, etc.); field kitchens. 

(21) Workshop vans, equipped ith various machines and tools, welding appliances, etc. 

(22) Mobile banks, travelling li raries, and mobile showrooms for the display of goods. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Self-propelled road rollers (he ding 84.29). 

(b) Agricultural rollers (heading 4.32). 

(c) Small mobile pedestrian-con olled appliances, fitted with an auxiliary engine (e.g. sweepers for 
parks, public gardens, etc., an appliances used to mark lines on roads) (heading 84.79). 

(d) Motor-homes (heading 87.03 

XVII-8705-2 



• 87.05 

MOTOR VEHICLE CHASSIS OR LORRIES (TRUCKS) COMBINED WITH 
WORKING MACHINES 

It should be noted that to be classified in this heading, a vehicle comprising lifting or handling 
machinery, earth levelling, excavating or boring machinery, etc., must form what is in fact an 
essentially complete motor vehicle chassis or lorry (truck) in that it comprises at least the 
following mechanical features : propelling engine, gear box and controls for gear-changing, and 
steering and braking facilities. 

On the other hand, self-propelled machines (e.g., cranes, excavators) in which one or more of the 
propelling or control elements referred to above are located in the cab of a working machine mounted on 
a wheeled or track-laying chassis, whether or not the whole can be driven on the road under its own 
power, remain classified in, for example, heading 84.26, 84.29 or 84.30. 

Similarly, this heading excludes self-propelled wheeled machines in which the chassis and the working 
machine are specially designed for each other and form an integral mechanical unit (e.g., self-propelled 
motor graders). In this case, the machine is not simply mounted on a motor vehicle chassis, but is 
completely integrated with a chassis that cannot be used for other purposes and may incorporate the 
essential automobile features referred to above. 

It should be noted, however, that self-propelled snow-ploughs or snow-blowers with built-in 

III equipment always fall in this heading. 
0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 8705.10 

See the Explanatory Note to heading 87.05, Item (7). 

XVII-8705-3 



87.06 • 
87.06 - Chassis fitted with en vines, for the motor vehicles of headings 87.01 to 87.05. 

This heading covers the chas is-frames or the combined chassis-body framework (unibody or 
monocoque construction), for the motor vehicles of headings 87.01 to 87.05, fitted with their 
engines and with their transm ssion and steering gear and axles (with or without wheels). That 
is to say, goods of this headin are motor vehicles without bodies. 

The chassis classified in this h ading may, however, be fitted with bonnets (hoods), windscreens 
(windshields), mudguards , ru ening-boards and dashboards (whether or not equipped with 
instruments). Chassis also rem in classified here whether or not fitted with tyres, carburettors or 
batteries or other electrical ec uipment. However, if the article is a complete or substantially 
complete tractor or other vehic e it is not covered by this heading. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Chassis fitted with engines and cabs, whether or not the cab is complete (e.g., without seat) 
(headings 87.02 to 87.04) (s e Note 3 to this Chapter). 

(b) Chassis not fitted with e gines, whether or not equipped with various mechanical parts 
(heading 87.08). 

XVII-8706-1 



• 87.07 

87.07 - Bodies (including cabs), for the motor vehicles of headings 87.01 to 87.05. 

8707.10 - For the vehicles of heading 87.03 

8707.90 - Other 

This heading covers the bodies (including cabs) for the motor vehicles of headings 87.01 
to 87.05. 

It covers not only bodies designed to be mounted on a chassis, but also bodies for vehicles 
without chassis (in which case the body itself supports the engine and axles); it further includes 
unit construction bodies in which certain elements of the chassis are incorporated in the body. 

The heading covers a wide range of bodies for various types of vehicles (e.g., passenger 
vehicles, lorries (trucks) and special purpose vehicles). They are generally made of steel, 
lightweight alloys, wood or plastics. 

• They may be completely equipped (e.g., with all their fittings and accessories such as 
dashboards, boots (trunks), seats and cushions, mats, luggage racks and electrical fittings). 

Incomplete bodies also fall in this heading, for example, those in which parts such as 
windscreens or doors remain to be added, or those in which the upholstery or paintwork has not 
been completely finished. 

Driving cabs (e.g., for lorries (trucks) and tractors) are also classified in this heading. 

XVII-8707-1 



87.08 • 
87.08 - Parts and accessories of the motor vehicles of headings 87.01 to 87.05. 

8708.10 - Bumpers a d parts thereof 

- Other parts and accessories of bodies (including cabs) : 

8708.21 - Safety se t belts 

8708.29 - - Other 

8708.30 Brakes and servo-brakes; parts thereof 

8708.40 Gear boxes and parts thereof 

8708.50 Drive-axles with differential, whether or not provided with other 
transmissio components, and non-driving axles; parts thereof 

8708.70 Road whee § and parts and accessories thereof 

8708.80 Suspension systems and parts thereof (including shock-absorbers) 

- Other parts nd accessories : 

8708.91 - - Radiators nd parts thereof 

8708.92 - - Silencers mufflers) and exhaust pipes; parts thereof 

8708.93 - Clutches d parts thereof 

8708.94 - - Steering vlieels, steering columns and steering boxes; parts thereof 

8708.95 - - Safety airbags with inflater system; parts thereof 

8708.99 - - Other 

This heading covers parts and accessories of the motor vehicles of headings 87.01 to 87.05, 
provided the parts and accesso 'es fulfil both the following conditions : 

(i) They must be identi able as being suitable for use solely or principally with the 
above-mentioned vehi les; 

and (ii) They must not be ex luded by the provisions of the Notes to Section XVII (see the 
corresponding Genera Explanatory Note). 

Parts and accessories of this he ding include : 

(A) Assembled motor vehicle chassis-frames (whether or not fitted with wheels but without 
engines) and parts thereo (side-members, braces, cross-members; suspension mountings; 
supports and brackets for the coachwork, engine, running-boards, battery or fuel tanks, 
etc.). 

XVII-8708-1 



• 87.08 

(B) Parts of bodies and associated accessories, for example, floor boards, sides, front or rear 
panels, luggage compartments, etc.; doors and parts thereof; bonnets (hoods); framed 
windows, windows equipped with heating resistors and electrical connectors, window 
frames; running-boards; wings (fenders), mudguards; dashboards; radiator cowlings; 
number-plate brackets; bumpers and over-riders; steering column brackets; exterior 
luggage racks; visors; non-electric heating and defrosting appliances which use the heat 
produced by the engine of the vehicle; safety seat belts designed to be permanently fixed 
into motor vehicles for the protection of persons; floor mats (other than of textile material 
or unhardened vulcanised rubber), etc. Assemblies (including unit construction 
chassis-bodies) not yet having the character of incomplete bodies, e.g., not yet fitted with 
doors, wings (fenders), bonnets (hoods) and rear compartment covers, etc., are classified in 
this heading and not in heading 87.07. 

(C) Clutches (cone, plate, hydraulic, automatic, etc., but not the electro-magnetic clutches of 
heading 85.05), clutch casings, plates and levers, and mounted linings. 

(D) Gear boxes (transmissions) of all types (mechanical, overdrive, preselector, 

• electro-mechanical, automatic, etc.); torque converters; gear box (transmission) casings; 
shafts (other than internal parts of engines or motors); gear pinions; direct-drive 
dog-clutches and selector rods, etc. 

(E) Drive-axles, with differential; non-driving axles (front or rear); casings for differentials; 
sun and planet gear pinions; hubs, stub-axles (axle journals), stub-axle brackets. 

(F) Other transmission parts and components (for example, propeller shafts, half-shafts; gears, 
gearing; plain shaft bearings; reduction gear assemblies; universal joints). But the heading 
excludes internal parts of engines, such as connecting-rods, push-rods and valvelifters of 
heading 84.09 and crank shafts, cam shafts and flywheels of heading 84.83. 

(G) Steering gear parts (for example, steering column tubes, steering track rods and levers, 
steering knuckle tie rods; casings; racks and pinions; servo-steering mechanisms). 

(H) Brakes (shoe, segment, disc, etc.) and parts thereof (plates, drums, cylinders, mounted 
linings, oil reservoirs for hydraulic brakes, etc.); servo-brakes and parts thereof. 

(LT) Suspension shock-absorbers (friction, hydraulic, etc.) and other suspension parts (other 
than springs), torsion bars. 

(K) Road wheels (pressed steel, wire-spoked, etc.), whether or not fitted with tyres; tracks and 
sets of wheels for tracked vehicles; rims, discs, hub-caps and spokes. 

(L) Control equipment, for example, steering wheels, steering columns and steering boxes, 
steering wheel axles; gear-change and hand-brake levers; accelerator, brake and clutch 
pedals; connecting-rods for brakes, clutches. 

(M) Radiators, silencers (mufflers) and exhaust pipes, fuel tanks, etc. 

(N) Clutch cables, brakes cables, accelerator cables and similar cables, consisting of a flexible 
outer casing and a moveable inner cable. They are presented cut to length and equipped 
with end fittings. 

• 
XVII-8708-2 



87.08 

(0) Safety airbags of all typ s with inflater system (e.g., driver-side airbags, passenger-side 
airbags, airbags to be ins ailed in door panels for side-impact protection or airbags to be 
installed in the ceiling o the vehicle for extra protection for the head) and parts thereof. 
The inflater systems inc ude the igniter and propellant in a container that directs the 
expansion of gas into t airbag. The heading excludes remote sensors or electronic 
controllers, as they are no considered to be parts of the inflater system. 

The heading does not cover hydr ulic or pneumatic cylinders of heading 84.12. 

XVII-8708-3 



• 87.09 

87.09 - Works trucks, self-propelled, not fitted with lifting or handling equipment, of the 
type used in factories, warehouses, dock areas or airports for short distance 
transport of goods; tractors of the type used on railway station platforms; parts of 
the foregoing vehicles. 

- Vehicles : 

8709.11 - - Electrical 

8709.19 - - Other 

8709.90 - Parts 

This heading covers a group of self-propelled vehicles of the types used in factories, 
warehouses, dock areas or airports for the short distance transport of various loads (goods or 
containers) or, on railway station platforms, to haul small trailers. 

Such vehicles are of many types and sizes. They may be driven either by an electric motor with 

• current supplied by accumulators or by an internal combustion piston engine or other engine. 

The main features common to the vehicles of this heading which generally distinguish them 
from the vehicles of heading 87.01, 87.03 or 87.04 may be summarised as follows : 

(1) Their construction and, as a rule, their special design features, make them unsuitable for the 
transport of passengers or for the transport of goods by road or other public ways. 

(2) Their top speed when laden is generally not more than 30 to 35 km/h. 

(3) Their turning radius is approximately equal to the length of the vehicle itself. 

Vehicles of this heading do not usually have a closed driving cab, the accommodation for the 
driver often being no more than a platform on which he stands to steer the vehicle. Certain types 
may be equipped with a protective frame, metal screen, etc., over the driver's seat. 

The vehicles of this heading may be pedestrian controlled. 

Works trucks are self-propelled trucks for the transport of goods which are fitted with, for 
example, a platform or container on which the goods are loaded. 

Small tank trucks of a kind generally used in railway stations, whether or not fitted with 
subsidiary pumps, are also classified here. 

Tractors of the type used on railway station platforms are designed primarily to tow or push 
other vehicles, e.g., small trailers. They do not themselves carry goods, and are generally lighter 
and less powerful than the tractors of heading 87.01. Tractors of this type may also be used on 
wharfs, in warehouses, etc. 

PARTS 

This heading also covers parts of the vehicles specified in the heading, provided the parts fulfil 
both the following conditions : 

• 
XVII-8709-1 



87.09 • 
(i) They must be identi fable as being suitable for use solely or principally with such 

vehicles; 

and (ii) They must not be eluded from this heading by the provisions of the Notes to 
Section XVII (see th corresponding General Explanatory Note). 

Parts of this heading include : 

( I) Chassis. 

(2) Bodies, platforms, detach . ble sides, tipping bodies. 

(3) Wheels, whether or not fi ed with tyres. 

(4) Clutches. 

(5) Gear boxes (transmission ') , differentials. 

(6) Axles. 

(7) Steering wheels or bars. 

(8) Braking systems and parts thereof. 

(9) Clutch cables, brake cabl s, accelerator cables and similar cables, consisting of a flexible 
outer casing and a move .le inner cable. They are presented cut to length and equipped 
with end fittings. 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Straddle carriers and works cks fitted with a crane (heading 84.26). 

(b) Fork-lift trucks and other wor s trucks fitted with lifting or handling equipment (heading 84.27). 

(c) Dumpers (heading 87.04). 

XVII-8709-2 



• 87.10 

87.10 - Tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles, motorised, whether or not fitted with 
weapons, and parts of such vehicles. 

This heading covers tanks and other armoured fighting "Vehicles, motorised, whether or not 
fitted with weapons, and" parts of such vehicles. 

Tanks are armoured fighting vehicles mounted on tracks, and armed with various weapons 
(guns, machine-guns, flame-throwers, etc.) usually housed in a traversing turret. They are 
sometimes fitted with a special gyroscopic stabilisation gear to keep the sights on the target, 
irrespective of the movement of the vehicle. They may also be equipped with anti-mining 
devices, such as a "flail" (a rotating drum which is carried on arms in front of the tank and to 
which are attached chains with ball ends) or a number of heavy rollers attached to the front of 
the tanks. 

The heading also includes amphibious tanks. 

Armoured cars are faster and lighter than tanks and cannot carry such heavy armour or mount 
such large guns. Sometimes they are only partly armoured. They are mainly used for police 

• duties, reconnaissance or for transport in fighting areas. Some armoured cars are track-laying, 
but the majority are of the road-wheel type. They may be amphibious (e.g., track-laying 
armoured landing vehicles). 

This heading also covers : 

(A) Tanks equipped with a crane for the recovery of fighting vehicles. 

(B) Armoured supply vehicles, generally of the track-laying type, whether or not they are 
designed to be armed; these are used for the transport of petrol, ammunition, etc., in 
fighting areas. 

(C) Small remote-controlled "tanks" which carry ammunition to advanced fighting vehicles or 
artillery units. 

(D) Armoured vehicles permanently fitted with special demolition equipment. 

(E) Armoured personnel carriers. 

The heading excludes cars and lorries of the conventional type, lightly armoured or equipped with 
subsidiary removable armour (headings 87.02 to 87.05 as appropriate). 

Self-propelled artillery weapons fall in heading 93.01; they are characterised by the fact that they are 
designed to fire when stationary, the weapon itself having a limited traverse. 

PARTS 
The heading also covers parts of the above-mentioned vehicles provided the parts fulfil both 
the following conditions : 

(i) They must be identifiable as being suitable for use solely or principally with such 
vehicles; 

and (ii) They must not be excluded by the provisions of the Notes to Section XVII (see the 
corresponding General Explanatory Note). 

• 
XVII-8710-1 



87.10 • 
Parts of this heading include : 

(1) Bodies of armoured vehi •,I es and parts thereof (turrets, armoured doors and bonnets, etc.). 

(2) Tracks, specially construe ted for use with tanks. 

(3) Special road-wheels for oured cars. 

(4) Propulsion wheels for to tracks. 

(5) Armour plates, worked to such an extent that they are identifiable as parts of the vehicles of 
this heading. 

(6) Clutch cables, brake cabl s, accelerator cables and similar cables, consisting of a flexible 
outer casing and a move ble inner cable. They are presented cut to length and equipped 
with end fittings. 

XVII-8710-2 



• 87.11 

87.11 - Motorcycles (including mopeds) and cycles fitted with an auxiliary motor, with or 
without side-cars; side-cars. 

8711.10 - With reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity 
not exceeding 50 cc 

8711.20 - With reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity 
exceeding 50 cc but not exceeding 250 cc 

8711.30 - With reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity 
exceeding 250 cc but not exceeding 500 cc 

8711.40 - With reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity 
exceeding 500 cc but not exceeding 800 cc 

8711.50 - With reciprocating internal combustion piston engine of a cylinder capacity 
exceeding 800 cc 

• 8711.60 - With electric motor for propulsion 

8711.90 - Other 

This heading covers a group of two-wheeled motorised vehicles which are essentially designed 
for carrying persons. 

In addition to motorcycles of the conventional type, the heading includes motor-scooters, 
characterised by their small wheels and by a horizontal platform which joins the front and rear 
portions of the vehicle; mopeds, equipped with both a built-in engine and a pedal system; and 
cycles fitted with an auxiliary motor. 

This heading also covers two-wheeled, electrically-powered transportation devices, designed for 
carrying a single person, for use within low speed areas such as pavements (sidewalks), paths, 
and bicycle lanes. Their technology allows the rider to stand upnght while a system composed 
of gyroscope sensors and multiple onboard microprocessors maintains both the device's and 
rider's balance on two independent, non-tandem wheels. Motorcycles of this heading, which are 
propelled by one or more electric motors, are known as "Electric Motorcycles". These 
motorcycles incorporate an electric accumulator pack supplying power to the electric motors. 
The electric accumulators of these "plug-in" type motorcycles can be recharged by plugging 
them into an electrical power grid outlet or charging station. 

Motorcycles may be equipped to protect the driver against the weather or be fitted with a 
side-car. 

Three-wheeled vehicles (e.g., the "delivery tricycle" type) are also classified here provided they 
do not have the characteristics of motor vehicles of heading 87.03 or heading 87.04 (see the 
Explanatory Notes to headings 87.03 and 87.04). 

The heading further covers side-cars of all kinds, a type of vehicle which is designed for the 
transport of passengers or goods, and which cannot be used independently. They are equipped 
with a wheel on one side, the other side bearing fittings enabling the side-car to be attached to, 
and to travel alongside, a cycle or motorcycle. 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Four-wheeled motor vehicles, for the transport of persons, with tube chassis, having a motor-car type 
steering system (e.g., a steering system based on the Ackerman principle) (heading 87.03). 

(b) Trailers designed for attachment to a cycle or motorcycle (heading 87.16). 

XVII-8711-1 



 

87.12 

6 
87.12 - Bicycles and other cy les (including delivery tricycles), not motorised. 

This heading covers non-mot rised cycles, i.e., pedal-operated vehicles equipped with one or 
more wheels (e.g., bicycles (in luding those for children), tricycles and quadricycles). 

The heading includes, in addi ion to cycles of conventional design, various specialised types 
such as the following : 

(1) Delivery tricycles, usuall in the form of an articulated unit incorporating a container 
(sometimes insulated) wh ch is constructed over the two leading wheels. 

(2) Tandem bicycles. 

(3)  Monocycles (unicycles) and bicycles specially designed for music-hall artists and 
characterised by their ligh weight, fixed wheel, etc. 

(4) Bicycles specially cons cted for the disabled (e.g., with a special attachment so that the 
bicycle can be pedalled w'th one foot). 

(5) Bicycles equipped with a heeled balancing-support fitted to a hub of the rear-wheel. 

(6) Racing bicycles. 

(7) Quadricycles, equippedith several seats and several sets of pedals, the whole being 
enclosed within a lightwei ht structure. 

(8) Pedal-driven bicycle-like cooters designed to be ridden by children, youngsters and adults, 
with bicycle-type adjusta le steering column and handle-bar, inflatable wheels, frame and 
hand brakes, equipped wit a single pedal attached to a chain and sprocket system. 

The cycles of this heading quipped with side-cars remain classified here, but side-cars 
presented separately are exclu d (heading 87.11). 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Cycles fitted with an auxilia motor (heading 87.11). 

(b) Children's cycles (other than hildren's bicycles) (heading 95.03). 

(c) Special cycles suitable only for fairground use (heading 95.08). 

XVII-8712-1 



• 87.13 

87.13 - Carriages for disabled persons, whether or not motorised or otherwise mechanically 
propelled. 

8713.10 - Not mechanically propelled 

8713.90 - Other 

This heading covers carriages, wheelchairs, or similar vehicles, specially designed for the 
transport of disabled persons, whether or not fitted with means of mechanical propulsion. 

Vehicles fitted with means of mechanical propulsion are usually driven by a light motor, or 
propelled by hand by means of a lever or handle-operated mechanism. The other carriages for 
disabled persons are pushed by hand or propelled by direct manual operation of the wheels. 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Normal vehicles simply adapted for use by disabled persons (for example, a motor car fitted with a 
hand-operated clutch, accelerator, etc. (heading 87.03), or a bicycle fitted with a special attachment 

• and pedalled with one foot (heading 87.12)). 

(b) Trolley-stretchers (heading 94.02). 

• 

• 
XVII-8713-1 



87.14 

87.14 - Parts and accessories of vehicles of headings 87.11 to 87.13. 

8714.10 - Of motorc cies (including mopeds) 

8714.20 - Of carriage for disabled persons 

- Other : 

8714.91 - - Frames a d forks, and parts thereof 

8714.92 - - Wheel ri s and spokes 

8714.93 - - Hubs, ot er than coaster braking hubs and hub brakes, and free-wheel 
sprocket- heels 

8714.94 - - Brakes, luding coaster braking hubs and hub brakes, and parts thereof 

8714.95 - - Saddles 

8714.96 - - Pedals ano crank-gear, and parts thereof 

8714.99 - - Other 

This heading covers parts and accessories of a kind used with motorcycles (including mopeds), 
cycles fitted with an auxiliary motor, side-cars, non-motorised cycles, or carriages for disabled 
persons, provided the parts an accessories fulfil both the following conditions : 

(i) They must be identi cable as being suitable for use solely or principally with the 
above-mentioned veh cies; 

and (ii) They must not be ex luded by the provisions of the Notes to Section XVII (see the 
corresponding Gener 1 Explanatory Note). 

Parts and accessories of this h ding include : 

(1) Bodies and parts thereof or delivery tricycles, side-cars or carriages for disabled persons 
(hoods, doors, floors, etc. 

(2)  Chassis and frames, and p rts thereof. 

(3)  Gearing, gear boxes, clu ches and other transmission equipment, and parts thereof, for 
motorcycles. 

(4)  Wheels and parts thereof I ubs, rims, spokes, etc.). 

(5)  Free-wheel sprocket-whe Is. 

(6)  Derailleurs and other gear mechanisms, and parts thereof. 

(7)  Crank-gear and parts the eof (crank-wheels, cranks, axles, etc.), pedals and parts thereof 
(axles, etc.); toe-clips. 

(8)  Kickstarters, levers and ot er control gear. 

XVII-8714-1 



• 87.14 

(9) Brakes of all kinds (cantilever brakes, caliper brakes, drum brakes, hub brakes, disc brakes, 
coaster braking hubs, etc.), and parts thereof (levers, block-holder levers, drums and shoes 
for hub brakes, yokes for cantilever brakes). 

(10) Handle-bars, handle-bar stems, and handle-bar grips (of cork, plastics, etc.). 

(11) Saddles (seats) and saddle-pillars (seat-posts); saddle-covers. 

(12) Forks, including telescopic forks, and parts thereof (fork crowns and blades, etc.). 

(13) Tubes and lugs for cycle frames. 

(14) Hydraulic shock-absorbers and parts thereof. 

(15) Mudguards and their supports (stays, fastening rods, etc.). 

(16) Reflectors (mounted). 

(17) Clothes protectors (other than nets of heading 56.08); transmission-chain covers; 
foot-rests and leg-protectors. 

(18) Stands for motorcycles. 

(19) Tilting cowls and spare-wheel covers, for scooters. 

(20) Silencers (mufflers) and parts thereof. 

(21) Fuel tanks. 

(22) Windscreens (windshields). 

(23) Luggage racks; lamp brackets; water-bottle brackets. 

(24) Propelling levers and crank-handles, back-rests and back-rest steering columns, foot-rests, 
leg-supports, armrests, etc., for carriages for disabled persons. 

(25) Clutch cables, brake cables, accelerator cables and similar cables, consisting of a flexible 
outer casing and a moveable inner cable. They are presented cut to length and equipped 
with end fittings. 

XV11-8714-2 



87.15 • 
87.15 - Baby carriages and p rts thereof. 

The heading covers : 

(I) Baby carriages, whethe or not folding, fitted with two or more wheels and generally 
pushed by hand (push-ch . irs, perambulators, strollers, etc.). 

(II) Parts of the above-me tioned carriages, provided the parts fulfil both the following 
conditions : 

(i) They must be i a entifiable as being suitable for use solely or principally with the 
carriages of this I eading; 

and	(ii) They must not e excluded by the provisions of the Notes to Section XVII (see 
the correspondi g General Explanatory Note). 

Parts of this heading include : 

(1) Bodywork for mounting In chassis, including the removable type of perambulator bodies 
which can be used as cra les. 

(2) Chassis and parts thereof. 

(3) Wheels (whether or not fi ed with their tyres) and parts thereof. 

XVII-8715-1 



• 87.16 

87.16 - Trailers and semi-trailers; other vehicles, not mechanically propelled; parts thereof. 

8716.10 - Trailers and semi-trailers of the caravan type, for housing or camping 

8716.20 - Self-loading or self-unloading trailers and semi-trailers for agricultural 
purposes 

- Other trailers and semi-trailers for the transport of goods : 

8716.31 - - Tanker trailers and tanker semi-trailers 

8716.39 - - Other 

8716.40 - Other trailers and semi-trailers 

8716.80 - Other vehicles 

8716.90 - Parts 

This heading covers a group of non-mechanically propelled vehicles (other than those of the 
preceding headings) equipped with one or more wheels and constructed for the transport of 
goods or persons. It also includes non-mechanical vehicles not fitted with wheels (e.g., sledges, 
special sleds running on timber trackways). 

The vehicles of this heading are designed to be towed by other vehicles (tractors, lorries, trucks, 
motorcycles, bicycles, etc.), to be pushed or pulled by hand, to be pushed by foot or to be drawn 
by animals. 

The heading includes : 

(A) Trailers and semi-trailers. 

For the purposes of this heading, the terms "trailers" and "semi-trailers" means vehicles 
(other than side-cars) of a kind designed solely to be coupled to another vehicle by means 
of a special coupling device (whether or not automatic). 

The most important types of trailers and semi-trailers falling in this group are those 
designed for use with motor vehicles. Trailers usually have two or more sets of wheels, and 
a coupling system mounted on the swivelling front wheels which steer the vehicles. 
Semi-trailers are fitted with rear wheels only, the forward end resting on the platform of 
the towing vehicle to which it is coupled by a special coupling device. 

For the purposes of the following Explanatory Note, the term "trailers" includes 
semi-trailers. 

Trailers falling here include : 

(1) Trailers of the caravan type (travel trailers), for housing or camping. 

(2) Self-loading agricultural trailers fitted with automatic loading devices and possibly 
also with attachments for chopping forage, maize (corn) stalks, etc. 

This heading does not cover self-loading trailers permanently mounted with harvesting 
equipment, for cutting, chopping and transporting grass, maize (corn), etc. (heading 84.33). 

XVII-8716-1 



87.16 • 
(3) Self-unloading trailers for carrying different products (forage, manure, etc.), with a 

moving floor for u loading purposes; these vehicles can be fitted with various 
attachments (manure chopper, forage shredder, etc.) to adapt them for use as a muck 
spreader, forage box o r root trailer. 

(4) Other trailers for the a ansport of goods such as : 

(a) Tanker trailers ( ether or not fitted with pumps). 

(b) Agricultural, publ'c works, etc., trailers (whether or not tipping). 

(c) Refrigerator or in ulated trailers for the transport of perishable goods. 

(d) Removal trailers. 

(e) Single or double- a ecker trailers for the transport of livestock, motor cars, cycles, etc. 

(f) Trailers adapted f r the transport of certain goods (e.g., plate glass). 

(g) "Road-rail" (inte odal) trailers (intended mainly for use as road trailers, but so 
designed that the may be transported on special railway wagons fitted with guide 
rails). 

(h) Trailers fitted wit rails for road transport of railway wagons. 

(ij) Drop-frame trailers with loading ramps for the transport of heavy equipment 
(tanks, cranes, bu ldozers, electrical transformers, etc.). 

(k) Two- or four-whe 1 independent timber-carrying bogies. 

(1) Logging trailers fur the transport of timber. 

(m) Small trailers tow d by cycles or motor cycles. 

(5) Other trailers such as 

(a) Motor vehicle trai ers specially designed for the conveyance of persons. 

(b) Fairground caray. s (other than those of heading 95.08). 

(c) Exhibition trailers 

(d) Library-trailers. 

(B) Hand- or foot-propelled vehicles. 

This group includes : 

(1) Trucks and trolleys o various kinds including those specialised for use in particular 
industries (in the texti e or ceramic industries, in dairies, etc.). 

XVII-8716-2 



• 87.16 

(2) Wheelbarrows, luggage-trucks, hopper-trucks and tipping-trucks. 

(3) Food carts, buffet trolleys (other than the type falling in heading 94.03), of a kind 
used in railway stations. 

(4) Hand-carts, e.g., for waste disposal. 

(5) Rickshaws. 

(6) Small insulated barrows for use by ice cream vendors. 

(7) Tradesmen's barrows of all kinds. These lightweight vehicles are sometimes fitted with 
pneumatic tyres. 

(8) Sledges (hand-drawn) for the transport of wood in mountainous country. 

(9) "Kicksleds", propelled by the direct pressure of the rider's foot on the snow covered 
ground, designed particularly for the transport of persons in subarctic regions. 

This heading does not cover : 

(a) Walking aids known as "walker-rollators", which generally consist of a tubular metal frame on three 
or four wheels (some or all of which may swivel), handles and hand-brakes (heading 90.21). 

(b) Small wheeled-containers (e.g., wheeled-baskets) of basketwork, metal, etc., not incorporating a 
chassis, of a kind used in shops (classification according to their constituent material). 

(C) Vehicles drawn by animals. 

This group includes : 

(1) State (ceremonial) -coaches, coupes, calashes, hackney-coaches, cabriolets. 

(2) Hearses. 

(3) Sulkies. 

(4) Children's donkey-carts and pony-carts used in public gardens, squares, etc. 

(5) Delivery vehicles of all kinds; removal vans. 

(6) Carts of all kinds, including tipping-carts. 

• (7) Sledges and sleighs. 

VEHICLES FITTED WITH MACHINERY, ETC. 

The classification of units consisting of vehicles with permanently built-on machines or 
appliances is determined according to the essential character of the whole. The heading 
therefore covers such units which derive their essential character from the vehicle itself. On the 
other hand, units deriving their essential character from the machine or appliance they 
incorporate are excluded. 

• 
XVII-8716-3 



87.16 • 
It follows from the above that 

(I) Trucks, carts or trailers with built-on tanks, whether or not they are fitted with subsidiary 
pumps for filling or emp ing purposes, are classified here. 

(II) The following, for exam le, are excluded and fall in the heading relating to the machine or 
appliance : 

(a) Hand-truck, animal ca or trailer-type spraying appliances of heading 84.24. 
(b) Machines and applianc s mounted on a simple wheeled chassis, designed to be towed, such as 

mobile pumps and co pressors (heading 84.13 or 84.14) and mobile cranes and ladders 
(heading 84.26 or 84.2 ). 

(c) Trailed concrete mixers (heading 84.74). 

PARTS 

This heading also includes pa s of the vehicles mentioned above, provided the parts comply 
with both the following condi lions : 

(i) They must be identi 'able as being suitable for use solely or principally with such 
vehicles; 

and (ii) They must not be ex luded by the provisions of the Notes to Section XVII (see the 
corresponding Gener 1 Explanatory Note). 

Parts of this heading include : 

(1) Chassis and component p: rts thereof (frame side members, cross members, etc.). 

(2) Axles. 

(3) Bodies and parts thereof. 

(4) Wooden or steel wheels d parts thereof, including wheels fitted with their tyres. 

(5) Coupling devices. 

(6) Brakes and parts thereof 

(7) Shafts, swingle-bars and imilar parts. 

* 
* * 

Winter sports equipment, such as boggans, bobsleighs (bobsleds), etc., is excluded (heading 95.06). 

XVII-8716-4 



88 

Chapter 88 

Aircraft, spacecraft, and parts thereof 

Subheading Note. 
1.- For the purposes of subheadings 8802.11 to 8802.40, the expression "unladen weight" means the 

weight of the machine in normal flying order, excluding the weight of the crew and of fuel and 
equipment other than permanently fitted items of equipment. 

GENERAL 

This Chapter covers balloons and dirigibles and non-powered aircraft (heading 88.01), other 
aircraft, spacecraft (including satellites) and spacecraft launch vehicles (heading 88.02), certain 
allied equipment such as parachutes (heading 88.04), and aircraft launching gear, deck-arrestor 
gear and ground flying trainers (heading 88.05). Subject to the .provisions of the Notes to 
Section XVII (see the General Explanatory Note to the Section), it also covers parts of such 
equipment. 

Incomplete or unfinished aircraft (e.g., aircraft not equipped with engines or internal equipment) 
are classified as the corresponding complete or finished aircraft, provided they have the 
essential character of the latter. 

XVII-88-1 



  

 

88.01 • 
88.01 - Balloons and dirigibl s; gliders, hang gliders and other non-powered aircraft. 

(I) BALLOONS AND DIRIGIBLES 

This group covers lighter-th n-air aircraft whatever their intended use (military, sporting, 
scientific, publicity, etc.). Th se comprise balloons, free or captive (i.e., moored to the ground 
by a cable), and mechanically iven dirigibles. 

This group also includes ballo ns of the following types, used in aeronautics or meteorology : 

(1) Sounding balloons. The e are used to carry radio-sounding instruments to high altitudes. 
They may weigh up to 4, 00 g, but their normal weight varies between 350 and 1,500 g. 

(2) Pilot balloons. These ar released to indicate the speed and direction of wind. Normally 
they weigh from 50 to 10 8- 

(3) Ceiling balloons. These are smaller than the balloons in (1) and (2) above and normally 
weigh 4 to 30 g. They ar used to determine cloud height. 

In most cases balloons used i meteorology are of very thin, high quality rubber allowing a high 
degree of expansion. Childr 's toy balloons are excluded (heading 95.03). They may be • 
distinguished by their infe or quality, short inflation necks and the advertisements or 
decorations often found on th m. 

(II) LIDERS AND HANG GLIDERS 

Gliders are heavier-than-air craft which stay airborne using atmospheric currents. However, 
gliders fitted with or designed to be fitted with an engine are classified in heading 88.02. 

Hang gliders include, in parti ular, delta wings which enable one or two persons, suspended by 
a harness, to perform certai aerial manoeuvres. These wings consist of material (generally 
textile) stretched over a rigid tructure, usually tubular and of metal, incorporating a horizontal 
steering bar in the centre. Ot er types of hang gliders may be otherwise shaped, but are similar 
to delta wings in their structur and aerodynamic behaviour. 

(III) 0 HER NON-POWERED AIRCRAFT 

This group includes kites w 'eh are heavier-than-air aircraft without mechanical propulsion. 
Kites are moored to the gro by a line in the same way as captive balloons and may be used, 
for example, to carry meteoro gical instruments. 

Kites clearly designed as toys are excluded (heading 95.03). 

* * 

The heading also excludes mo els, whether or not built accurately to scale, used, for example, for 
decoration (e.g., heading 44.20 r 83.06), for purely demonstrational purposes (heading 90.23), or as 
toys or models for recreational p oses (heading 95.03). 

XVII-8801-1 



• 88.02 

88.02 - Other aircraft (for example, helicopters, aeroplanes); spacecraft (including satellites) 
and suborbital and spacecraft launch vehicles. 

- Helicopters : 

8802.11 - - Of an unladen weight not exceeding 2,000 kg 

8802.12 - - Of an unladen weight exceeding 2,000 kg 

8802.20 - Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight not exceeding 2,000 kg 

8802.30 - Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding 2,000 kg but 
not exceeding 15,000 kg 

8802.40 - Aeroplanes and other aircraft, of an unladen weight exceeding 15,000 kg 

8802.60 - Spacecraft (including satellites) and suborbital and spacecraft launch 
vehicles 

This heading covers : 

(1) Heavier-than-air aircraft, which are mechanically propelled. This group includes 
aeroplanes (landplanes, seaplanes and amphibians), gyroplanes (equipped with one or 
more rotors rotating freely on vertical axes), and helicopters (equipped with one or more 
mechanically driven rotors). 

Such aircraft may be used for military purposes, the transport of persons or goods or for 
such activities as training, aerial .photography, agricultural work, rescue duties, fire fighting 
or for meteorological or other scientific purposes. 

Radio-guided aircraft controlled from the ground or from another aircraft are covered by 
this heading, as are aircraft specially constructed so that they can be used as road vehicles. 

(2) Spacecraft, which are vehicles able to travel outside the earth's atmosphere (e.g., 
telecommunications or meteorological satellites). 

(3) Spacecraft launch vehicles whose function is to place a given payload on a trajectory 
orbiting the earth ("satellite launch vehicles") or falling under the influence of a 
gravitational field other than that of the earth ("spacecraft launch vehicles"). These vehicles 
impart to the payload a terminal velocity exceeding 7,000 m/s at the end of the powered 
flight. 

(4) Suborbital launch vehicles that follow a parabolic trajectory and generally carry 
instrumentation for scientific or other technical purposes, whether or not in the form of a 
retrievable payload, beyond the earth's atmosphere. In cases where payloads are released, 
these vehicles do not impart a terminal velocity exceeding 7,000 m/s. Payloads are often 
returned to the earth's surface by parachute for recovery. 

The heading excludes, however, artillery rockets, guided missiles, e.g., "ballistic missiles", and similar 
munitions of war which do not impart a terminal velocity exceeding 7,000 m/s to the payload 
(heading 93.06). They deliver munitions of war, e.g., explosives, submunitions, chemical agents, and 
after following a parabolic trajectory cause the payload to impact on a target. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Models, whether or not built accurately to scale, used, for example, for decoration (e.g., 
heading 44.20 or 83.06) or for purely demonstrational purposes (heading 90.23). 

(b) Toys or models for recreational purposes (heading 95.03). 

XVII-8802-1 



88.03 • 
88.03 - Parts of goods of hea ing 88.01 or 88.02. 

8803.10 - Propellers nd rotors and parts thereof 

8803.20 - Under-carri ges and parts thereof 

8803.30 - Other parts f aeroplanes or helicopters 

8803.90 - Other 

This heading covers parts of he goods falling in heading 88.01 or 88.02, provided the parts 
fulfil both the following condi 'ons : 

(i) They must be identifi ble as being suitable for use solely or principally with the goods 
of the above-mentioned headings; 

and (ii) They must not be ex luded by the provisions of the Notes to Section XVII (see the 
corresponding Gener 1 Explanatory Note). 

The parts of this heading inclu e : 

(I) Parts of balloons and di 'gibles, such as : 

(1) Nacelles. 

(2) Envelopes and parts t ereof (strips or panels). 

(3) Carrier hoops. 

(4) Ballonets. 

(5) Rigid frames and sect ons thereof. 

(6) Stabilisers and rudder 

(7) Propellers for dirigibls. 

(II) Parts of aircraft includi g gliders and kites, e.g. : 

(1) Fuselages and hulls; fuselage or hull sections; also their internal or external parts 
(radomes, tail cone , fairings, panels, partitions, luggage compartments, floors, 
instrument panels, fra nes, doors, escape chutes and slides, windows, port-holes, etc.). 

(2) Wings and their components (spars, ribs, cross-members). 

(3) Control surfaces, whether or not movable (ailerons, slats, spoilers, flaps, elevators, 
rudders, stabilisers, servo-tabs, etc.). 

(4) Nacelles, cowlings, ei gine pods and pylons. 

(5) Undercarriages (inclu ling brakes and brake assemblies) and their retracting equipment; 
wheels (with or witho t tyres); landing skis. 

(6) Seaplane floats. 

(7) Propellers (airscrews , rotors for helicopters and gyroplanes; blades for propellers and 
rotors; pitch control echanisms for propellers and rotors. 

(8) Control levers (contr. 1 columns, rudder-bars and various other operational levers). 

(9) Fuel tanks, including uxiliary fuel tanks. 

XVII-8803-1 



• 88.04 

88.04 - Parachutes (including dirigible parachutes and paragliders) and rotochutes; parts 
thereof and accessories thereto. 

This heading covers parachutes used for the descent of personnel, military supplies or 
equipment, meteorological instruments, flares, etc.; certain types are used as tail chutes for 
slowing jet propelled aircraft. According to their use, they may be of various sizes, and may be 
made of silk, man-made fibre materials, linen, cotton, paper, etc. 

The upper part of the conventional type of parachute, as used by personnel, usually consists of a 
small pilot chute which opens when the rip cord is pulled. This, in turn, opens the main chute 
canopy to which are attached a certain number of shroud lines. These cords are brought 
together at the bottom into two or more risers, attached to the harness which is worn by the 
parachutist and which consists of an assembly of straps, fitted with buckles and snap-hooks. The 
pilot chute, the main chute canopy and the shroud lines are packed carefully in a container 
which is opened by means of the rip cords. 

This heading also covers paragliders which are designed for launching oneself from the side of 
a mountain, the top of a cliff, etc., and which consist of a folding canopy or shroud (wing), cord 
shroud lines for steering in air currents and a harness for the pilot. 

However, their similarity to parachutes does not extend to aerodynamic behaviour, since under 
certain conditions and if air currents so permit, paragliders may follow ascending trajectories. 

The heading also includes rotochutes, a type of apparatus with a rotating wing unit, used in 
meteorology to control the descent of rocket-launched radio-sounding instruments. 

The heading also covers parts and accessories for parachutes, such as the container, harness and 
spring frames for opening the parachute, and parts and accessories for rotochutes. 

XVII-8804-1 



I 

88.05 

88.05 - Aircraft launching sear; deck-arrestor or similar gear; ground flying trainers; parts 
of the foregoing articlles. 

8805.10 - Aircraft la ching gear and parts thereof; deck-arrestor or similar gear and 
parts there f 

- Ground fly ng trainers and parts thereof : 

8805.21 - - Air combiit simulators and parts thereof 

8805.29 - - Other 

This heading covers three enti ely distinct types of goods, viz. : 

(A) Aircraft launching gear 

Aircraft launching gear, generally used on board ships, incorporates a metal structure 
which guides the aircra to be launched. The acceleration required for the take-off is 
provided by the action o compressed air, steam, exploding cartridges, etc., exerted on a 
trolley or ram on which the aircraft is mounted. 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Motor driven winch ge used for launching gliders (heading 84.25). 

(b) Rocket-launching ram s and towers which merely guide rockets during take-off without 
propelling them, the ro ets climbing under their own power (heading 84.79). 

(B) Deck-arrestor or simila gear. 

This gear, used on aircra carriers and at some aerodromes, serves to reduce the speed of 
an aircraft at the momen of landing, in order to shorten the length of runway needed for 
the aircraft to come to a It. 

The heading does not, h wever, cover other equipment, such as safety equipment (nets, for 
example). 

(C) Ground flying trainers. 

Examples of these devices which are used for training pilots include : 

(1) Flight simulators w ich function electronically. Flying conditions are simulated by 
electronic apparatus hich feed into the controls the correct combination of "feel" and 
reading correspondin to given flying conditions. Air combat simulators refer to any 
electronic or mecha cal system for training aircraft pilots by simulating air combat 
conditions during fli t. 

When mounted on a otor vehicle chassis or trailer, this type of equipment is classified in 
heading 87.05 or 87.16 respectively (but see the Explanatory Note to heading 87.16). 

(2) A device known as a "link trainer" comprising a small cabin pivoting on a base and 
equipped as an aero lane cockpit enabling the pupil to carry out all the manoeuvres 
required in normal fl ing. 

XVII-8805-1 



88.05 

PARTS 

This heading also covers parts of the above-mentioned articles, provided the parts fulfil both 
the following conditions : 

(i) They must be identifiable as being suitable for use solely or principally with such 
articles; 

and (ii) They must not be excluded by the provisions of the Notes to Section XVII (see the 
corresponding General Explanatory Note). 

* * 

The heading excludes, however, equipment principally intended to register human reactions under 
arduous flying conditions (e.g., high acceleration, shortage of oxygen); such equipment (e.g., 
compartments built on a rotating arm which simulate supersonic flying conditions) is in the nature of 
reflex-testing apparatus and as such is classified in heading 90.19. 

Equipment which is not specially designed for the flying training of pilots but for the general instruction 
of aircrews (e.g., large scale models of gyroscopes) is also excluded (heading 90.23). 

XVII-8805-2 



• 

• 

• 



• 89 

Chapter 89 

Ships, boats and floating structures 

Note. 

1.- A hull, an unfinished or incomplete vessel, assembled, unassembled or disassembled, or a complete 
vessel unassembled or disassembled, is to be classified in heading 89.06 if it does not have the 
essential character of a vessel of a particular kind. 

GENERAL 
This Chapter covers ships, boats and other vessels of all kinds (whether or not self-propelled), 
and also floating structures such as coffer-dams, landing stages and buoys. It also includes 
air-cushion vehicles (hovercraft) designed to travel over water (sea, estuaries, lakes), whether or 
not able to land on beaches or landing-stages or also able to travel over ice (see Note 5 to 
Section XVII). 

110 	The Chapter also includes : 

(A) Unfinished or incomplete vessels (e.g., those not equipped with their propelling machinery, 
navigational instruments, lifting or handling machinery or interior furnishings). 

(B) Hulls of any material. 

Complete vessels presented unassembled or disassembled, and hulls, unfinished or incomplete 
vessels (whether assembled or not), are classified as vessels of a particular kind, if they have the 
essential character of that kind of vessel. In other cases, such goods are classified in 
heading 89.06. 

Contrary to the provisions relating to the transport equipment falling in other Chapters of Section XVII, 
this Chapter excludes all separately presented parts (other than hulls) and accessories of vessels or 
floating structures, even if they are clearly identifiable as such. Such parts and accessories are classified 
in the appropriate headings elsewhere in the Nomenclature, for example : 

(1) The parts and accessories specified in Note 2 to Section XVII. 

(2) Wooden oars and paddles (heading 44.21). 

(3) Ropes and cables of textile material (heading 56.07). 

1111 	(4) Sails (heading 63.06). 

(5) Masts, hatchways, gangways, rails and bulkheads for ships or boats and parts of hulls, having the 
character of metal structures of heading 73.08. 

(6) Cables of iron or steel (heading 73.12). 

(7) Anchors of iron or steel (heading 73.16). 

(8) Propellers and paddle-wheels (heading 84.87). 

(9) Rudders (headings 44.21, 73.25, 73.26, etc.) and other steering or rudder equipment for ships or 
boats (heading 84.79). 

XVII-89-1 



89 • 
The following are also excluded om this Chapter : 

(a) Model vessels used for ornamental purposes (e.g., galleons and other sailing vessels) 
(headings 44.20, 83.06, etc.) 

(b) Demonstrational apparatus o models of heading 90.23. 

(c) Torpedoes, mines and simila munitions of war (heading 93.06). 

(d) Wheeled toys, in the form of .oats, designed to be ridden by children and other toys (heading 95.03). 

(e) Water-skis and the like (hea ing 95.06). 

(f) Small boats for use on round bouts or other fairground amusements (heading 95.08). 

(g) Antiques of an age exceeding 100 years (heading 97.06). 

Amphibious motor vehicles and ir-cushion vehicles designed to travel over both land and certain tracts 
of water (swamps, etc.) are classi led as motor vehicles in Chapter 87, and seaplanes and flying boats fall 
in heading 88.02. 

XVII-89-2 



• 89.01 

89.01 - Cruise ships, excursion boats, ferry-boats, cargo ships, barges and similar vessels for 
the transport of persons or goods. 

8901.10 - Cruise ships, excursion boats and similar vessels principally designed for the 
transport of persons; ferry-boats of all kinds 

8901.20 - Tankers 

8901.30 - Refrigerated vessels, other than those of subheading 8901.20 

8901.90 - Other vessels for the transport of goods and other vessels for the transport of 
both persons and goods 

This heading covers all vessels for the transport of persons or goods, other than vessels of 
heading 89.03 and lifeboats (other than rowing boats), troop-ships and hospital ships 
(heading 89.06); they may be for sea navigation or inland navigation (e.g., on lakes, canals, 
rivers, estuaries). 

The heading includes : 

(1) Cruise ships and excursion boats. 

(2) Ferry-boats of all kinds, including train-ferries, car-ferries and small river-ferries. 

(3) Tankers (petrol, methane, wine, etc.). 

(4) Refrigerated vessels for the transport of meat, fruit, etc. 

(5) Cargo vessels of all kinds (other than tankers and refrigerated vessels), whether or not 
specialised for the transport of specific goods. These include ore vessels and other bulk 
carriers (for the transport of, e.g., grain, coal), container ships, Ro-Ro (roll-on-roll-off) 
ships and LASH-type vessels. 

(6) Barges of various kinds, lighters and pontoons being flat-decked vessels used for the 
transport of goods and, sometimes, of persons. 

(7) Vessels of the hydroglider type, hydrofoils and hovercraft. 

XVII-8901-1 



89.02 • 
89.02 - Fishing vessels; facto ry ships and other vessels for processing or preserving fishery 

products. 

This heading covers all types of fishing vessels designed for commercial fishing at sea or on 
inland waters, but excluding wing boats for fishing (heading 89.03). These include trawlers 
and tuna fishing vessels. 

The heading also includes fact ry ships (for preserving fish, etc.). 

Fishing vessels which may be used for excursions, generally during the tourist season, are also 
classified in this heading. 

Sports fishing vessels are, howev r, excluded (heading 89.03). 

XVII-8902-1 



• 89.03 

89.03 - Yachts and other vessels for pleasure or sports; rowing boats and canoes (+). 

8903.10 - Inflatable 

- Other : 

8903.91 - - Sailboats, with or without auxiliary motor 

8903.92 - - Motorboats, other than outboard motorboats 

8903.99 - - Other 

This heading covers all vessels for pleasure or sports and all rowing boats and canoes. 

This heading includes yachts, marine jets and other sailboats and motorboats, dinghies, kayaks, 
sculls, skiffs, pedalos (a type of pedal-operated float), sports fishing vessels, inflatable craft and 
boats which can be folded or disassembled. 

• The heading also covers lifeboats propelled by oars (other lifeboats fall in heading 89.06). 

Sailboards are, however, excluded (heading 95.06). 
0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 8903.92 

"Outboard motors" are described in the Explanatory Note to heading 84.07. 

• 

• 
XVII-8903-1 



89.04 

89.04 - Tugs and pusher craft. 

This heading covers : 

(A) Tugs. These are vessels rimarily designed for towing other craft. They may be of the type 
used for sea or for inlan navigation. They are distinguishable from other vessels by their 
specially shaped and stre gthened hulls, by their powerful engines disproportionate to the 
size of the vessel, and by arious deck fittings designed to carry a tow rope, hawser, etc. 

(B) Pusher craft. These are essels specially designed for pushing barges, lighters, etc. They 
are mainly distinguished y a snub bow (for pushing) and an elevated wheel house (which 
may be telescopic). 

The heading also covers "pus er-tugs" designed for use both as pusher craft and as tugs. Like 
pusher craft they have a snu bow, but the stern is raked so that they can make way in that 
direction and tow barges, etc. 

Tugs designed to assist ships i distress, are also covered by this heading. 

The vessels of this heading ar not designed for the transport of persons or goods. They may be 
fitted with specialised auxili ry equipment for fire-fighting, pumping, cargo heating, etc. 
However, fire-floats are exclu ed (heading 89.05). 

XVII-8904-1 



• 89.05 

89.05 - Light-vessels, fire-floats, dredgers, floating cranes, and other vessels the navigability 
of which is subsidiary to their main function; floating docks; floating or submersible 
drilling or production platforms. 

8905.10 - Dredgers 

8905.20 - Floating or submersible drilling or production platforms 

8905.90 - Other 

This heading covers : 

(A) Light-vessels, fire-floats, dredgers, floating cranes, and other vessels the navigability 
of which is subsidiary to their main function. 

These normally perform their main function in a stationary position. They include : 
light-vessels; drill-ships; fire-floats; dredgers of all kinds (e.g., grab or suction dredgers); 
salvage ships for the recovery of sunken vessels; permanently moored air-sea rescue floats; 

• bathyscaphes; pontoons fitted with lifting or handling machines (e.g., derricks, cranes, 
grain elevators) and pontoons clearly designed to serve as a base for these machines. 

House-boats, laundry boats and floating mills are also covered by this group. 

(B) Floating docks. 

Floating docks are a type of floating workshop used instead of dry docks. 

They are generally structures of a U-section comprising a platform and side-walls, and are 
equipped with pumping compartments which enable them to be partly submerged to permit 
the entrance of vessels requiring repair. In some cases they may be towed. 

A further type of floating dock functions in a similar manner, but is self-propelled and 
equipped with powerful engines. These are used for the repair or transport of amphibious 
vehicles or other craft. 

(C) Floating or submersible drilling or production platforms. 

Such .platforms are generally designed for the discovery or exploitation of off-shore 
deposits of oil or natural gas. Apart from the equipment required for drilling or production, 
such as derricks, cranes, pumps, cementing units, silos, etc., these platforms have living 
quarters for the personnel. 

These platforms, which are towed or in some cases self-propelled to the exploration or 
production site and are sometimes capable of being floated from one site to another, may 
be divided into the following main groups : 

(1) Self-elevating platforms which, apart from the working platform itself, are fitted with 
devices (hulls, caissons, etc.) which enable them to float, and with retractable legs 
which are lowered on the work site so that they are supported on the sea bed and raise 
the working platform above the water level. 

• 
XVII-8905-1 



89.05 • 
(2) Submersible platfor s, the substructures of which are submerged over the work sites 

with their ballast to s resting on the sea bed in order to provide a high degree of 
stability to the worki g platform which is kept above the water level. The ballast tanks 
may have skirts or pi es which penetrate more or less deeply into the sea bed. 

(3) Semi-submersible p atforms which are similar to submersible platforms, but differ 
from them in that th submerged part does not rest on the sea bed. When working, 
these floating platfo s are kept in a fixed position by anchor lines or by dynamic 
positioning. 

Fixed platforms used for the discovery or exploitation of off-shore deposits of oil or natural gas, 
which are neither floating nor submersible, are excluded from this heading (heading 84.30). 

This heading also excludes fe -boats (heading 89.01), factory ships for processing fishery products 
(heading 89.02), cable-laying shi s and weather ships (heading 89.06). 

XVII-8905-2 



• 89.06 

89.06 - Other vessels, including warships and lifeboats other than rowing boats. 

8906.10 - Warships 

8906.90 - Other 

This heading covers all vessels not included in the more specific headings 89.01 to 89.05. 

It covers : 

(1) Warships of all kinds, these include : 

(a) Ships designed for warfare, fitted with various offensive weapons and defensive 
weapons and incorporating protective shields against projectiles (e.g., armour-plating 
or multiple watertight bulkheads), or with underwater devices (anti-magnetic 
mine-detectors). They are generally also fitted with detection and listening devices 
such as radar, sonar, infra-red detection apparatus and scrambling equipment for radio 
transmissions. 

• Ships of this category may be distinguished from merchant ships by their greater speed 
and manoeuvrability, by the size of the crew, by bigger fuel tanks and by special 
magazines for the transport and use of ammunition at sea. 

(b) Certain specially fitted ships which do not carry weapons or armour-plating but yet are 
recognisable as wholly or mainly for use in warfare, such as landing craft or certain 
fleet auxiliaries (for transporting ammunition or mines, etc.), troop-ships. 

(c) Submarines. 

(2)  Ships having certain characteristics of warships but which are used by public authorities 
(e.g., by Customs and police). 

(3)  Lifeboats for placing on board ships, as well as those which are intended to be placed at 
certain points around the coast to help ships in distress. However, lifeboats propelled by 
oars fall in heading 89.03. 

(4)  Scientific research vessels; laboratory ships; weather ships. 

(5)  Vessels for the transportation and mooring of buoys; cable ships for laying underwater 
cables, e.g., for telecommunications. 

(6) Pilot-boats. 

(7)  Ice-breakers. 

• (8) Hospital ships. 

(9) Hopper-barges for the disposal of dredged material, etc. 

• 
XVII-8906-1 



89.06 • 
The heading also includes Vracones", i.e., collapsible contrivances for the waterborne 
transport (by simple towing) 5 f fluids and other goods, consisting of a flexible casing of coated 
textile fabric, identifiable by t leir shape (generally like a cigar) and by the presence of various 
devices such as stabilisers, to ing fittings and sometimes buoyancy tubes. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Pontoons (flat-decked vessel used for the transport of persons or goods) (heading 89.01). 

(b) Pontoons clearly designed to erve as bases for floating cranes, etc. (heading 89.05). 

(c) Pontoons of the hollow cyli a er type for the support of temporary bridges, etc., and rafts of all kinds 
(heading 89.07). 

XVII-8906-2 



• 89.07 

89.07 - Other floating structures (for example, rafts, tanks, coffer-dams, landing-stages, 
buoys and beacons). 

8907.10 - Inflatable rafts 

8907.90 - Other 

This heading. covers certain floating structures not having the character of vessels. They are 
generally stationary when in use and include : 

(1) Pontoons of the hollow cylinder type used for the support of temporary bridges, etc. But 
pontoons having the character of vessels are excluded (heading 89.01 or 89.05). 

(2) Floating tanks used to contain live crustaceans or fish. 

(3) Floating tanks used in certain harbours to supply ships with oil, water, etc. 

(4) Coffer-dams being cases used in bridge building, etc. 

(5) Floating landing-stages. 

(6) Buoys, such as mooring buoys, marking buoys, light or bell buoys. 
• 

(7) Beacons used for marking channels, navigational hazards, etc. 

(8) Re-floating appliances used to refloat boats. 

(9) Paravanes, a type of float used in mine-sweeping. 

(10) Rafts of all kinds including floating craft of circular shape, which inflate automatically on 
contact with the sea, for carrying shipwrecked persons. 

(11) Floating structures designed to function as dock-gates. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Diving bells of the type comprising a metal chamber lowered or raised by external means (i.e., a 
lifting appliance); these are generally classified in heading 84.79. 

(b) Life-belts and life jackets (classified according to their constituent material). 

(c) Sailboards (heading 95.06). 

XVII-8907-1 



89.08 • 
89.08 - Vessels and other fib ting structures for breaking up. 

This heading is restricted to the  vessels and other floating structures of headings 89.01 to 89.07 
when presented for the purpo4e  of being broken up. Such vessels may be obsolete or damaged, 
and may have had their mstru ents, machinery, etc., removed prior to presentation. 

XVII-8908-1 



• XVIII 

Section XVIII 

OPTICAL, PHOTOGRAPHIC, CINEMATOGRAPHIC, MEASURING, 
CHECKING, PRECISION, MEDICAL OR SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS 

AND APPARATUS; CLOCKS AND WATCHES; 
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS; 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES THEREOF 

• 

• 

• 
XVIII-1 



• 

• 

• 

• 



• 90 

Chapter 90 

Optical, photographic, 
cinematographic, measuring, checking, 

precision, medical or surgical instruments 
and apparatus; parts and accessories thereof 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Articles of a kind used in machines, appliances or for other technical uses, of vulcanised rubber 
other than hard rubber (heading 40.16), of leather or of composition leather (heading 42.05) or of 
textile material (heading 59.11); 

• (b) Supporting belts or other support articles of textile material, whose intended effect on the organ 
to be supported or held derives solely from their elasticity (for example, maternity belts, thoracic 
support bandages, abdominal support bandages, supports for joints or muscles) (Section XI); 

(c) Refractory goods of heading 69.03; ceramic wares for laboratory, chemical or other technical 
uses, of heading 69.09; 

(d) Glass mirrors, not optically worked, of heading 70.09, or mirrors of base metal or of precious 
metal, not being optical elements (heading 83.06 or Chapter 71); 

(e) Goods of heading 70.07, 70.08, 70.11, 70.14, 70.15 or 70.17; 

(f) Parts of general use, as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV) or similar 
goods of plastics (Chapter 39); 

(g) Pumps incorporating measuring devices, of heading 84.13; weight-operated counting or 
checking machinery, or separately presented weights for balances (heading 84.23); lifting or 
handling machinery (headings 84.25 to 84.28); paper or paperboard cutting machines of all kinds 
(heading 84.41); fittings for adjusting work or tools on machine-tools or water-jet cutting 
machines, of heading 84.66, including fittings with optical devices for reading the scale (for 
example, "optical" dividing heads) but not those which are in themselves essentially optical 
instruments (for example, alignment telescopes); calculating machines (heading 84.70); valves 
or other appliances of heading 84.81; machines and apparatus (including apparatus for the 
projection or drawing of circuit patterns on sensitised semiconductor materials) of 
heading 84.86; 

(h) Searchlights or spotlights of a kind used for cycles or motor vehicles (heading 85.12); portable 
electric lamps of heading 85.13; cinematographic sound recording, reproducing or re-recording 
apparatus (heading 85.19); sound-heads (heading 85.22); television cameras, digital cameras and 
video camera recorders (heading 85.25); radar apparatus, radio navigational aid apparatus or 
radio remote control apparatus (heading 85.26); connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre 
bundles or cables (heading 85.36); numerical control apparatus of heading 85.37; sealed beam 
lamp units of heading 85.39; optical fibre cables of heading 85.44; 

(ij) Searchlights or spotlights of heading 94.05; 

(k) Articles of Chapter 95; 

(1) Monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles, of heading 96.20; 

(m) Capacity measures, which are to be classified according to their constituent material; or 

(n) Spools, reels or similar supports (which are to be classified according to their constituent 
material, for example, in heading 39.23 or Section XV). 

• 
XVIII-90-1 



90 • 
2.- Subject to Note 1 above, p . and accessories for machines, apparatus, instruments or articles of this 

Chapter are to be classified a cording to the following rules : 

(a) Parts and accessories hich are goods included in any of the headings of this Chapter or of 
Chapter 84, 85 or 91 (ot er than heading 84.87, 85.48 or 90.33) are in all cases to be classified in 
their respective heading 

(b) Other parts and access ries, if suitable for use solely or principally with a particular kind of 
machine, instrument or pparatus, or with a number of machines, instruments or apparatus of the 
same heading (includin a machine, instrument or apparatus of heading 90.10, 90.13 or 90.31) 
are to be classified with e machines, instruments or apparatus of that kind; 

(c) All other parts and accessories are to be classified in heading 90.33. 

3.- The provisions of Notes 3 an 4 to Section XVI apply also to this Chapter. 

4.- Heading 90.05 does not appl to telescopic sights for fitting to arms, periscopic telescopes for fitting 
to submarines or tanks, or t telescopes for machines, appliances, instruments or apparatus of this 
Chapter or Section XVI; suc telescopic sights and telescopes are to be classified in heading 90.13. 

5.- Measuring or checking optic instruments, appliances or machines which, but for this Note, could be 
classified both in heading 90. 3 and in heading 90.31 are to be classified in heading 90.31. 

6.- For the purposes of heading 0.21, the expression "orthopaedic appliances" means appliances for : • 
- Preventing or correcting odily deformities; or 

- Supporting or holding pa s of the body following an illness, operation or injury. 

Orthopaedic appliances inc ude footwear and special insoles designed to correct orthopaedic 
conditions, provided that the are either (1) made to measure or (2) mass-produced, presented singly 
and not in pairs and designed to fit either foot equally. 

7.- Heading 90.32 applies only t 

(a) Instruments and appar tus for automatically controlling the flow, level, pressure or other 
variables of liquids or ases, or for automatically controlling temperature, whether or not their 
operation depends on electrical phenomenon which varies according to the factor to be 
automatically controllea which are designed to bring this factor to, and maintain it at, a desired 
value, stabilised against disturbances, by constantly or periodically measuring its actual value; 
and 

(b) Automatic regulators o electrical quantities, and instruments or apparatus for automatically 
controlling non-electric 1 quantities the operation of which depends on an electrical phenomenon 
varying according to th factor to be controlled, which are designed to bring this factor to, and 
maintain it at, a desire value, stabilised against disturbances, by constantly or periodically 
measuring its actual val e. 

XVIII-90-2 



• 90 

GENERAL 

(I) GENERAL CONTENT AND ARRANGEMENT OF THE CHAPTER 

This Chapter covers a wide variety of instruments and apparatus which are, as a rule, 
characterised by their high finish and high precision. Most of them are used mainly for scientific 
purposes (laboratory research work, analysis, astronomy, etc.), for specialised technical or 
industrial purposes (measuring or checking, observation, etc.) or for medical purposes. 

The Chapter includes in particular : 

(A) A wide group comprising not only simple optical elements of headings 90.01 and 90.02, 
but also optical instruments and apparatus ranging from spectacles of heading 90.04 to 
more complex instruments used in astronomy, photography, cinematography or for 
microscopic observation. 

(B) Instruments and apparatus designed for certain specifically defined uses (surveying, 
meteorology, drawing, calculating, etc.). 

(C) Instruments and appliances for medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses, or for related 
purposes (radiology, mechano-therapy, oxygen therapy, orthopaedy, prosthetics, etc.). 

• 
(D) Machines, instruments and appliances for testing materials. 

(E) Laboratory instruments and appliances. 

(F) A large group of measuring, checking or automatically controlling instruments and 
apparatus, whether or not optical or electrical and in particular those of heading 90.32 as 
defined in Note 7 to the Chapter. 

Some of these instruments are specified in certain headings, for example, compound optical 
microscopes (heading 90.11), electron microscopes (heading 90.12), other instruments and 
apparatus are covered by more general descriptions in headings which refer to a particular 
science, industry, etc. (e.g., astronomical instruments of heading 90.05, surveying instruments 
and appliances of heading 90.15, X-ray, etc., apparatus of heading 90.22). This Chapter also 
includes vacuum apparatus of a kind used in medical, surgical, dental or veterinary sciences 
(heading 90.18). 

There are certain exceptions to the general rule that the instruments and apparatus of this 
Chapter are high precision types. For example, the Chapter also covers ordinary goggles 
(heading 90.04), simple magnifying glasses and non-magnifying periscopes (heading 90.13), 
divided scales and school rules (heading 90.17) and fancy hygrometers, irrespective of their 

• accuracy (heading 90.25). 

Except for certain exclusions referred to in Note 1 to this Chapter (e.g., rubber or leather 
washers and gaskets, and leather diaphragms for meters), the instruments, apparatus and parts 
thereof falling in this Chapter may be of any material (including precious metals or metal clad 
with precious metal, precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed)). 

• 
XVIII-90-3 



90 • 
(II) INCOMPLETE R UNFINISHED MACHINES, APPARATUS, ETC. 

( ee General Interpretative Rule 2 (a)) 

Provided they have the esset  tial character of the complete or finished article, incomplete or 
unfinished machines, applian • es, instruments or apparatus are classified with the corresponding 
complete or finished articles for example, a photographic camera or a microscope presented 
without its optical elements or an electricity supply meter without its totalling device). 

(I I) PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

(Chapter Note 2) 

Subject to Chapter Note 1, parts or accessories identifiable as suitable for use solely or 
principally with the machi es, appliances, instruments or apparatus of this Chapter are 
classified with those machine , appliances, etc. 

This general rule does not, ho ever, apply to : 

(1) Parts or accessories whic in themselves constitute articles falling in any particular heading 
of this Chapter or of Ch pter 84, 85 or 91 (other than the residual heading 84.87, 85.48 
or 90.33. For example, vacuum pump for an electron microscope remains a pump of 
heading 84.14; transfo ers, electro-magnets, capacitors, resistors, relays, lamps or valves, 
etc., remain classified i Chapter 85; the optical elements of heading 90.01 or 90.02 
remain in the headings ci ed regardless of the instruments or apparatus to which they are to 
be fitted; a clock or wat h movement is always classified in Chapter 91; a photographic 
camera falls in headin 90.06 even if it is of a kind designed for use with another 
instrument (microscope, troboscope, etc.). 

(2) Parts or accessories sui ble for use with several categories of machines, appliances, 
instruments or apparatu falling in different headings of this Chapter are classified in 
heading 90.33, unless t ey are in themselves complete instruments, etc., specified in 
another heading (see par aph (1) above). 

(IV) MULTI-FUNCTIO111  OR COMPOSITE MACHINES, APPARATUS, ETC.; 
FUNCTIONAL UNITS 

(Chapter Note 3) 

Note 3 specifies that the prov sions of Notes 3 and 4 to Section XVI apply also to this Chapter 
(see Parts (VI) and (VII) of th General Explanatory Note to Section XVI). 

In general, multi-function m chines are classified according to the principal function of the 
machine. 

Multi-function machines are a le to carry out different operations. 

Where it is not possible to det rmine the principal function, and where, as provided in Note 3 to 
Section XVI, the context d es not otherwise require, it is necessary to apply General 
Interpretative Rule 3 (c). 

XVIII-90-4 



• 90 

Composite machines or apparatus consisting of two or more machines or apparatus of different 
kinds, fitted together to form a whole, consecutively or simultaneously performing separate 
functions which are generally complementary and are described in different headings of this 
Chapter, are also classified according to the principal function of the composite machine or 
apparatus. 

For the purposes of the above provisions, machines or apparatus of different kinds are taken to 
be fitted together to form a whole when incorporated one in the other or mounted one on the 
other, or mounted on a common base or frame or in a common housing. 

Assemblies of machines or apparatus should not be taken to be fitted together to form a whole 
unless the machines or apparatus are designed to be permanently attached either to each other or 
to a common base, frame, housing, etc. This excludes assemblies which are of a temporary 
nature or are not normally built as a composite machine, apparatus, etc. 

The bases, frames or housings may be provided with wheels so that the composite machines or 
apparatus can be moved about as required during use, provided they do not thereby acquire the 
character of an article (e.g., a vehicle) more specifically covered by a particular heading of the 
Nomenclature. 

Floors, concrete bases, walls, partitions, ceilings, etc., even if specially fitted out to 
accommodate machines or apparatus should not be regarded as a common base joining such 
machines or apparatus to form a whole. 

The provisions of Note 3 to Section XVI need not be invoked when the composite machines or 
apparatus are covered as such by a particular heading." 

This Chapter covers, as functional units, for example, the electrical (including electronic) 
instruments or apparatus which make up an analogue or digital telemetering system. These 
are essentially the following : 

(I) Apparatus at the transmitting end : 

(i) A primary detector (transducer, transmitter, analogue-digital converter, etc.) which 
transforms the quantity to be measured, whatever its nature, into a proportional 
current, voltage or digital signal. 

(ii) A measurement amplifier, transmitter and receiver basic unit which (if necessary) 
boosts this current, voltage or digital signal to the level required by the pulse or 
frequency-modulated transmitter. 

(iii) A pulse or frequency-modulated transmitter which transmits an analogue or digital 
signal to another station. 

(II) Devices at the receiving end : 

(i) A pulse, frequency-modulated or digital signal receiver which converts the 
information into an analogue or digital signal. 

(ii) A measurement amplifier or converter which, if necessary, amplifies the analogue 
or digital signal. 

(iii) Indicating or recording instruments calibrated in terms of the primary quantity and 
equipped with a mechanical pointer or opto-electronic display. 

XVIII-90-5 



90 • 
Telemetering systems are m inly used in oil, gas and production pipelines, water, gas and 
sewage disposal installations nd environmental monitoring systems. 

Line or radio transmitters ai d receivers for telemetering pulses remain in their respective 
headings (heading 85.17, 85. 5 or 85.27, as the case may be) unless they are combined as a 
single unit with the instrume its and apparatus referred to in (I) and (II) above or the whole 
forms a functional unit within the meaning of Note 3 to Chapter 90; the complete unit then falls 
in this Chapter. 

* * 

In addition to the exclusions me tioned in the text of the Explanatory Notes, the following are always 
excluded from this Chapter : 

(a) Articles of a kind used in ma hines, appliances or for other technical uses, of vulcanised rubber other 
than hard rubber (heading 4 .16), of leather or of composition leather (heading 42.05) or of textile 
material (heading 59.11). 

(b) Parts of general use, as define d in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV) or similar goods 
of plastics (Chapter 39). 

(c) Lifting or handling machine y (headings 84.25 to 84.28 and 84.86); fittings for adjusting work or 
tools on machine-tools or eater- et cutting machines, of heading 84.66, including fittings with 
optical devices for reading tI e scale (for example, "optical" dividing heads) but not those which are 
in themselves essentially o p :ical instruments (for example, alignment telescopes); radar apparatus, 
radio navigational aid appar us or radio remote control apparatus (heading 85.26). 

(d) Spacecraft equipped with ins ruments or apparatus of this Chapter (heading 88.02). 

(e) Toys, games, sports requisite and other articles of Chapter 95, and parts and accessories thereof. 

(0 Capacity measures; these are classified according to their constituent material. 

(g) Spools, reels or similar sup orts (classified according to their constituent material, for example, in 
heading 39.23 or Section X ). 

XVIII-90-6 



• 90.01 

90.01 - Optical fibres and optical fibre bundles; optical fibre cables other than those of 
heading 85.44; sheets and plates of polarising material; lenses (including contact 
lenses), prisms, mirrors and other optical elements, of any material, unmounted, 
other than such elements of glass not optically worked. 

9001.10 - Optical fibres, optical fibre bundles and cables 

9001.20 - Sheets and plates of polarising material 

9001.30 - Contact lenses 

9001.40 - Spectacle lenses of glass 

9001.50 - Spectacle lenses of other materials 

9001.90 - Other 

• This heading covers : 

(A) Optical fibres and optical fibre bundles, as well as optical fibre cables other than 
those of heading 85.44. 

Optical fibres consist of concentric layers of glass or plastics of different refractive 
indices. Those drawn from glass have a very thin coating of plastics, invisible to the naked 
eye, which renders the fibres less prone to fracture. Optical fibres are usually presented on 
reels and may be several kilometers in length. They are used to make optical fibre bundles 
and optical fibre cables. 

Optical fibre bundles may be rigid, in which case the fibres are agglomerated by a binder 
along their full length, or they may be flexible, in which case they are bound only at their 
ends. If coherently bundled, they are used for transmission of images, but if randomly 
bundled, they are suitable only for transmission of light for illumination. 

Optical fibre cables of this heading (which may be fitted with connectors) consist of a 
sheath containing one or more optical fibre bundles, the fibres of which are not individually 
sheathed. 

Optical fibre bundles and cables are used primarily in optical apparatus, particularly in 
endoscopes of heading 90.18. 

• (B) Polarising material in sheets or plates which consist of specially treated sheets or plates 
of plastics, or of sheets or plates in which a layer of "active' plastics is supported on one or 
both sides by other plastics or by glass. This sheet or plate material is cut to shape to make 
the polarising elements described at Item (6) below. 

(C) Optical elements of glass, optically worked, not permanently mounted. In order to 
distinguish between optical elements of glass of this heading and those of Chapter 70 it is 
necessary to determine whether or not they have been optically worked. 

• 
XVIII-9001-1 



90.01 • 
The optical working of g ass is usually performed in two stages, viz., the production of the 
surfaces to the shape req ired (i.e., with the necessary curvature, at the correct angle, etc.), 
and the polishing of th se surfaces. This working consists of grinding the surfaces by 
means of abrasives, rou, h at first, then gradually finer, the successive operations being 
roughing, trueing, smoot ing and polishing. Finally, in the case of lenses required to be of 
an exact diameter, the edges are ground; this is known as the centring and edging 
operation. This heading pplies only to optical elements of which the whole or part of their 
surface has been polish d in order to produce the required optical properties. It applies 
therefore to elements wh ch have been ground and polished as described above, and also to 
elements which have b en polished after moulding. The heading does not apply to 
unpolished elements hav ng undergone merely one or more of the processes which precede 
polishing. Such elements fall in Chapter 70. 

(D) Optical elements of an material other than glass, whether or not optically worked, 
not permanently moun ed (e.g., elements of quartz (other than fused quartz), fluorspar, 
plastics or metal; optical elements in the form of cultured crystals of magnesium oxide or 
of the halides of the alkal or the alkaline-earth metals). 

Optical elements are manufac red in such a way that they produce a required optical effect. An 
optical element does more t an merely allow light (visible, ultraviolet or infrared) to pass 
through it, rather the passag of light must be altered in some way, for example, by being 
reflected, attenuated, filtered, iffracted, collimated, etc. 

Optical elements with a temp rary mounting provided solely for protection during transport are 
considered to be unmounted. 

Subject to the provisions s t out above regarding optical elements of glass, this heading 
includes : 

(1) Prisms and lenses (incl ding compound prisms and lenses assembled by means of an 
adhesive cement), wheth r or not with unfinished edges. 

(2) Plates and discs with p1 ne orplane-parallel faces (e.g., proof planes or optical flats for 
checking the flatness of a surface). 

(3)  Ophthalmic lenses. T ese lenses may be aspherical, spherical, sphero-cylindrical, 
uni-focal, bi-focal or mul i-focal. They also include contact lenses. 

(4) Mirrors constituting o tical elements. These are used, for example, in telescopes, 
projectors, microscopes, edical, dental or surgical instruments, and sometimes as vehicle 
rear-view mirrors. 

(5)  Colour filters (e.g., for p otographic cameras). 

(6)  Polarising elements (fo microscopes or other scientific instruments; for sunglasses; for 
spectacles for viewing th e-dimensional cinematograph films, etc.). 

(7)  Diffraction gratings. Th se may be: 

(a) Highly polished glas on which parallel lines have been cut close together at regular 
intervals (e.g., 1001i es per millimetre). 

(b) "Replica" gratings c S sisting of a thin film of plastics or gelatin on a support such as a 
plate of glass. The hin film bears an impression of the lines of an original ruled 
grating. 

These gratings are used i the same way as prisms for study of spectra. 

XVIII-9001-2 



• 90.01 

(8)  Interference filters. These consist of alternate very thin films of, for example, magnesium 
fluoride and silver sandwiched between two plates of glass or between two 45° glass 
prisms (forming a cube). They are used as colour filters or for splitting a beam of light into 
two components. 

(9) Halftone or similar printing screens, generally round or rectangular (including 
square), of carefully polished glass (original screens for photogravure or process 
engraving), consisting of 

(i) two plates of glass, etched with very fine parallel lines, rendered opaque with a special 
varnish, which are then stuck together so that the lines are exactly at right angles; or 

(ii) a single glass plate on which small hollows, usually square, have been etched and 
rendered opaque with a special varnish. 

Some of the optical elements listed above (lenses, prisms, etc.) may be coloured, or coated with 
an anti-reflection film of cryolite, calcium or magnesium fluoride, etc. This does not affect their 
classification in this heading. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Cultured crystals, not being optical elements (generally heading 38.24). 

(b) Mirrors of heading 70.09, i.e., glass mirrors not optically worked. Simple plane or even curved 
mirrors (e.g., shaving mirrors and mirrors for powder compacts) are therefore classified in 
heading 70.09. 

(c) Optical elements of glass of heading 70.14, i.e., elements not optically worked (generally moulded) 
(see Explanatory Note to heading 70.14). 

(d) Glasses of heading 70.15, not optically worked (e.g., blanks for contact lenses or for corrective 
spectacle lenses, for goggles, for protecting the dials of measuring instruments, etc.). 

(e) Mirrors, not constituting optical elements, of precious metal (Chapter 71), or of base metal 
(heading 83.06). 

(f) Connectors for optical fibres, optical fibre bundles or cables (heading 85.36). 

(g) Optical fibre cables made up of individually sheathed fibres (heading 85.44). 

XVIII-9001-3 



   

  

 

90.02 • 
90.02 - Lenses, prisms, mirr rs and other optical elements, of any material, mounted, being 

parts of or fittings f r instruments or apparatus, other than such elements of glass 
not optically worked. 

- Objective nses : 

9002.11 - - For came as, projectors or photographic enlargers or reducers 

9002.19 - - Other 

9002.20 - Filters 

9002.90 - Other 

With the exception of ophtha mic lenses (which when mounted constitute spectacles, lorgnettes 
or the like of heading 90.04), this heading covers the articles referred to in Items (B), (C) and 
(D) of the Explanatory Note heading 90.01 when in a permanent mounting (viz., fitted in a 
support or frame, etc.) suita 'I e for fitting to an apparatus or instrument. The articles of the 
heading are mainly designed t be incorporated with other parts to form a specific instrument or 
part of an instrument. The h ading does not include mounted optical elements which are in 
themselves separate applianc s, for example, hand magnifying glasses (heading 90.13), and 
mirrors for medical or dental rposes (heading 90.18). 

Subject to the above conditio s, the heading includes : 

(1) Objective lenses, additio al lenses, colour filters, viewfinders, etc., for photographic or 
cinematographic cameras or for projectors. 

(2) Polarising filters for micr scopes or polarimeters. 

(3) Eyepieces and objectives including polarising) for astronomical instruments, binoculars or 
refracting telescopes, mic oscopes, etc. 

(4) Mounted prisms for instru ents or apparatus for physical or chemical analysis (polarimeters, 
etc.). 

(5) Mounted mirrors for telesc pes, projectors, microscopes, medical or surgical instruments, etc. 

(6) Optical elements (lenses and prisms) for lighthouses or beacons, mounted on panels or 
drums. 

(7) Mounted lenses clearly id ntifiable as fittings for optical benches. 

(8) Mounted halftone or simi r printing screens. 

The objective lens in an optic 1 instrument is the lens system that faces the object, giving an 
image of the latter. It may be a single lens but is usually a group of lenses in a single mounting. 

Eyepieces are optical system (placed near the eyes) through which a magnified image is 
observed. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Optical elements with a to porary mounting provided solely for protection during transport 
(heading 90.01). 

(b) Mounted glass mirrors, optic lly worked, which are unsuitable for fitting to instruments or apparatus 
(for example, certain rear-vie mirrors, chimney or drain inspection mirrors, and special mirrors for 
wind-tunnel observations) (h ading 90.13). 

(c) Sets of lenses put up in case and designed for fitting into special frames for sight testing (used by 
opticians) (heading 90.18). 

XVIII-9002-1 



• 90.03 

90.03 - Frames and mountings for spectacles, goggles or the like, and parts thereof. 

- Frames and mountings : 

9003.11 - - Of plastics 

9003.19 - - Of other materials 

9003.90 - Parts 

This heading covers frames and mountings, and parts thereof, for the spectacles or other articles 
of heading 90.04 (see the Explanatory Note to that heading). They are generally of base metal, 
precious metal, metal clad with precious metal, plastics, tortoise-shell or mother-of-pearl. They 
may also be of leather, rubber or fabric, for example, frames for goggles. 

Parts of frames include spectacle side-pieces and side-piece cores, hinges or joints, eye-rims, 
bridges, nose-pieces, spring devices for pince-nez, handles for lorgnettes, etc. 

Screws, chains (without securing device) and springs of base metal are not classified as parts of 
mountings but fall in their own respective headings (see Note 1 (f) to this Chapter). 

This heading also excludes mountings and parts thereof of articles sometimes referred to as "spectacles" 
but which do not fall in heading 90.04, e.g., special spectacles used by oculists for examining eyes 
(heading 90.18). 

• 

• 
XVIII-9003-1 



90.04 • 
90.04 - Spectacles, goggles a d the like, corrective, protective or other. 

9004.10 - Sunglasses 

9004.90 - Other 

This heading covers articles usually comprising a frame or support with lenses or shields of 
glass or other material), for u ' e in front of the eyes, generally intended either to correct certain 
defects of vision or to protec the eyes against dust, smoke, gas, etc., or dazzle; it also covers 
spectacles for viewing stereos opic (three-dimensional) pictures. 

Spectacles, pince-nez, lorgne es, monocles, etc., used for correcting vision, generally have 
optically worked lenses. 

Protective spectacles and gog les generally consist of plane or curved discs of ordina glass 
(whether or not optically orked, or tinted), of safety glass, of plastics (poly methyl 
methacrylate) polystyrene, et .), of mica, or of metal (wire gauze, or slotted plates). These 
articles include sunglasses, s ectacles used for mountaineering or winter sports, goggles for 
airmen, motorists, motor-cyc ists, chemists, welders, foundry workers, moulders, sand-blast 
machine operators, electrician , roadmen, quarrymen, etc. 

The heading also includes go gles for underwater use; removable spectacles (e.g., sunglasses) • 
for fitting to other spectacles (generally corrective spectacles) and used either as protective 
filters or, in some cases, as a • ditional corrective lenses; polarising spectacles fitted with lenses 
of plastics for viewing three-d ' mensional films (whether or not with a paperboard frame). 

PARTS 

Frames and mountings, and parts thereof, for spectacles or the like, are classified in 
heading 90.03. Eyepieces of lass are classified in heading 70.15 if not optically worked, or in 
heading 90.01 if optically w •rked; eyepieces of materials other than glass are classified in 
heading 90.01 if they constitu e optical elements; otherwise they are classified in this heading. 

* * 

As the heading covers only those spectacles, etc., designed to cover the eyes, it excludes articles designed 
to cover or protect most of the f ce (e.g., visors for welders; screens and eye-shades for motor-cyclists; 
face masks for underwater swim ing) 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Contact lenses of heading 9 1 01. 

(b) Opera or racing glasses and s milar articles, made with spectacle mountings (heading 90.05). 

(c) Toy spectacles (heading 95. 1 3). 

(d) Carnival articles (heading 9 '. 05). 

XVIII-9004-1 



• 90.05 

90.05 - Binoculars, monoculars, other optical telescopes, and mountings therefor; other 
astronomical instruments and mountings therefor, but not including instruments for 
radio-astronomy. 

9005.10 - Binoculars 

9005.80 - Other instruments 

9005.90 - Parts and accessories (including mountings) 

This heading includes : 

(1) Binoculars, such as opera glasses, binoculars for touring or hunting, military binoculars 
(including night glasses and certain periscopic binoculars) and binoculars made in the form 
of spectacles. 

(2) Telescopes for hunting, touring, for use at sea, for firing ranges, for health resorts (for 
observing scenery or the sky), etc. They may be in one piece (pocket or other telescopes) or 
with sliding drawers for focussing; they may also be designed to be fitted on a stand. 
Certain telescopes may incorporate a device so that they can be used only after the 
insertion of a coin. 

(3)  Astronomical refracting telescopes. Unlike reflecting telescopes which have a mirror for 
objective, refracting telescopes have objectives consisting of a system of lenses, some of 
which may be of large diameter. They are not equipped with an erecting eyepiece which 
would cause loss of light. 

The heading includes refracting telescopes whether designed for visual, visual and 
photographic, or solely for photographic observation. When equipped with a photographic 
camera which forms an integral part of the complete instrument, they are classified in this 
heading; however, a photographic camera which does not form an integral part of the 
complete instrument is classified in heading 90.06. 

(4) Reflecting telescopes. These are the main general purpose astronomical instruments. The 
objective, which forms the primary image, consists of a concave parabolic mirror which 
may be of a considerable diameter; the reflecting surface is silvered or aluminised. 

Reflecting telescopes are usually designed to be mounted on stands which are frequently 
large structures with considerable associated equipment. When equipped with a 
photographic camera which forms an integral part of the complete instrument, they are 
classified in this heading; however, a photographic camera which does not form an integral 
part of the complete instrument is classified in heading 90.06. 

This heading includes the Schmidt reflecting telescope, often referred to as the Schmidt 
camera. This is used solely in astronomy for photographic observation. It uses a spherical 
mirror and a correcting plate which is placed parallel to the mirror at the centre of its arc. 
The image is recorded at the focal point on a convex film. 

XVIII-9005-1 



90.05 • 
(5) Astronomical telescope fitted with photo-multipliers or image converter tubes. In this 

type of telescope the e ergy of the incident light is used to free electrons from a 
photoelectric surface pla • ed where the eyepiece would otherwise be. The electrons may be 
multiplied and measured o show the amount of light originally received by the telescope, 
or may be focussed (e.g., by magnetic lenses) to form an image on a photographic plate or 
fluorescent screen. 

(6) Transit instruments, w ich are used to observe the apparent passage (due to the rotation 
of the earth) of celestial odies above the meridian line at the place of observation. They 
consist essentially of a telescope mounted on an East-West horizontal axis and can 
therefore move within th meridian plane. 

Equatorial telescopes. hese are mounted on an equatorial stand which allows the 
telescope to move round n axis parallel to that of the earth (polar axis) and round another 
axis perpendicular to the ormer (axis of declination). 

Zenith telescopes, whic are telescopes mounted so as to move round a horizontal and a 
vertical axis. 

Altazimuths, or azimut circles. These are telescopes movable round a horizontal axis 
whereas their frames are ovable round a vertical axis. These instruments are designed to 
measure both altitudes a d azimuths. Theodolites are smaller instruments designed on the 
same principle, but used •r surveying and are excluded (heading 90.15). 

(10) Coelostats, which are nstruments intended to facilitate astronomical observations, 
particularly by reflecting a given part of the sky into a vertical or horizontal stationary 
instrument (telescope, spectroheliograph). They consist essentially of two plane mirrors, 
one of which is control ed by a clockwork movement and turns a complete circle in 
48 hours. 

Heliostats and siderosta s are special types of coelostats used for astronomical purposes. 
Certain instruments also called heliostats are used for surveying; these are excluded 
(heading 90.15). 

(11) Spectroheliographs and spectrohelioscopes, which are instruments used in studying the 
sun. The spectroheliograph is used to take photographs of the sun in the light of any desired 
wavelength. It consists of a spectroscope with a slit in place of the eyepiece so that only 
light of the desired wa 'elength can pass through it on to a photographic plate. The 
spectrohelioscope operat s on the same principle as the spectroheliograph but uses a 
rapidly oscillating slit so hat the sun can be viewed by the naked eye. Other methods (e.g., 
rotating glass prism with fixed slit) are used to obtain the same result. 

(12) Heliometers, which cons ist of a telescope with its object glass divided along a diameter, 
the two halves being mov able; they are used for measuring the sun's angular diameter and 
the angular distance betw en two heavenly bodies. 

(13) Coronographs and simi ar instruments, which are used to observe the sun's corona at 
times other than that of a otal solar eclipse. 

The heading also includes t lescopes, and more particularly binoculars, which utilize 
infra-red light and which inco porate image converter tubes to convert the magnified infra-red 
image into an image which cai i be seen by the human eye; these infra-red instruments are used 
at night, particularly by armee  forces. Also included are telescopes, binoculars and the like 
which utilise light amplifiers ( Iso known as image intensifiers) to increase the brightness of an 
image which is below the visu 1 threshold to a level where the image can be seen. 

However, in accordance with N • e 4 to this Chapter, this heading does not cover telescopic sights for 
fitting to arms, periscopic teles opes for fitting to submarines or tanks, or telescopes for machines, 
appliances, instruments or appar tus of this Chapter (for example, telescopes for fitting to theodolites, 
levels or other surveying instrum ts) or of Section XVI (heading 90.13). 

XVIII-9005-2 



• 90.05 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
this heading also covers parts and accessories of the goods of this heading. Such parts and 
accessories include : frames, housings, tubes and mountings; filar micrometers used with 
equatorial telescopes for measuring the diameters of planets (these devices consist of a 
graduated disc mounted on the eyepiece of the telescope and fitted with two fixed wires and one 
movable wire); Gerrish drives used with a motor to move astronomical instruments. 

* * 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Superstructures used for installing the instruments or facilitating access to them (domes, platforms, 
control boards, etc.); these are classified in their own appropriate headings (for example, in 
Section XV). 

• (b) Optical elements such as mirrors, lenses and prisms, presented separately (heading 90.01 or 90.02 as 
the case may be). 

(c) Blink microscopes, used in astronomy to find new stars by comparing photographs of the sky 
(heading 90.11). 

(d) "Door eyes" or through door viewers (heading 90.13). 

(e) Instruments used to determine a terrestrial position in relation to the stars, e.g., sextants 
(heading 90.14). 

(f) Microphotometers or microdensitometers for the study of spectrograms (heading 90.27). 

(g) Astronomical clocks (Chapter 91). 

• 

• 
XVIII-9005-3 



90.06 • 
90.06 - Photographic (other than cinematographic) cameras; photographic flashlight 

apparatus and flashb lbs other than discharge lamps of heading 85.39. 

9006.30 - Cameras s ecially designed for underwater use, for aerial survey or for 
medical or surgical examination of internal organs; comparison cameras for 
forensic or riminological purposes 

9006.40 - Instant prin cameras 

- Other came as : 

9006.51 - - With a th ugh-the-lens viewfinder (single lens reflex (SLR)), for roll film 
of a widt not exceeding 35 mm 

9006.52 - - Other, for roll film of a width less than 35 mm 

9006.53 - - Other, for roll film of a width of 35 mm 

9006.59 - - Other 

- Photograph c flashlight apparatus and flashbulbs : 

9006.61 - - Discharge lamp ("electronic") flashlight apparatus 

9006.69 - - Other 

- Parts and ac cessories : 

9006.91 - - For came r 

9006.99 - - Other 

(I) PHOTOGRAPHIC ( DTHER THAN CINEMATOGRAPHIC) CAMERAS 

This group covers all kinds o photographic cameras (other than cinematographic cameras), 
whether for professional or mateur use, and whether or not presented with their optical 
elements (objective lenses, vi wfinders, etc.). Photographic cameras are those in which the 
exposure of a chemical based ilm (e.g., silver halide), plate or paper to the image or light from 
the camera's optical system auses a chemical change to the film, plate or paper. Further 
processing is required to create a viewable image. 

There are many different type of cameras, but the conventional types consist essentially of a 
light-tight chamber, a lens, a s utter, a diaphragm, a holder for a photographic plate or film, and 
a viewfinder. Variations in th e e essential features characterise the different kinds of cameras, 
such as : 

(A) Box cameras; these are th simplest type. 

(B) Folding or collapsible ca i neras, for studio or amateur use. 

(C) Reflex cameras. In the m jority of these cameras, the image received by the objective lens 
is reflected from a mirror o the viewfinder by means of a special prism (single lens reflex). 
Other apparatus of this ty e have a second objective lens from which the image is reflected 
onto a screen at the top o he camera (twin lens reflex). 

XVIII-9006-1 



• 90.06 

(D) Pocket cameras which generally use film cassettes; however, some types use discs. 

These cameras may also incorporate an automatic focusing system, a motor drive for winding 
film, an integral flash and a liquid crystal display all of which may be controlled by a 
microprocessor. 

The cameras of this group include : 

(1) Stereo cameras, equipped with two identical lenses and a shutter which exposes two 
images simultaneously. 

(2) Panoramic cameras, used to photograph a wide panorama or a long line of people. The 
camera can be rotated at a uniform rate about a vertical axis, the exposure being made by a 
vertical slit which travels across the plate or film. 

(3) Recording cameras. These cameras generally have no shutter, the film moving 
continuously behind the lens. They are usually intended for combining with other apparatus 

• (for example, cathode-ray oscilloscopes) for recording transitory and ultra-rapid 
phenomena. 

(4) Instant print cameras (portable or cabinet type) in which processing is carried out 
automatically after exposure so that the finished photograph is available in a short time. 
Coin-, token- or magnetic card operated cabinet type instant print cameras are classified 
here and not in heading 84.76. 

(5) Cameras with wide angle lenses to cover a very wide field. Special lenses are used to give 
an all round view of the horizon. Extreme wide-angle cameras swing the lens during 
exposure in synchronisation with the shutter. 

(6) "Disposable" cameras, also known as "single-use" or "one-time use" cameras, which are 
pre-loaded with film which is generally not replaced after use. 

(7) View cameras. These consist of a flexible bellows which is attached to the front and rear 
panels that swing on a rigid base. The front panel holds the lens mounted on a board and 
the rear panel contains a film holder. The bellows connects the lens board to the film holder 
and allows them to move freely in relation to one another. 

(8) Cameras with air- and watertight cases for underwater photography. 

(9) Cameras with automatic shutter release (such as those with an electronically operated 
shutter) controlled by a watch movement designed to permit a series of shots to be taken at 
regular intervals. This type also includes cameras designed for photographing subjects 
without their knowledge; they are fitted with a photoelectric cell placed in the circuit of the 
shutter release, and some are in the form of a small wrist-watch. 

(10) Aerial survey cameras designed to take successive pictures at predetermined time 
intervals so that a strip of ground is covered by overlapping photographs. Some aerial 
survey cameras have multiple lenses to take vertical and oblique views. This group 
includes cameras for aerial photogrammetry. 

• 
XVIII-9006-2 



90.06 • 
(11) Cameras for terrestrial hotogrammetry consisting of two cameras, interconnected and 

fixed on a tripod, for tak ng photographs simultaneously. These cameras are mainly used 
for archeological research the upkeep of monuments or at road accidents. 

(12) Comparison cameras fo forensic or criminological purposes. With these cameras two 
articles can be photograp ed simultaneously and the images compared; these are used for 
verifying fingerprints, ch king forgeries, etc. 

(13) Cameras for medical o surgical purposes, e.g., those introduced in the stomach, for 
examination and subsequ nt diagnosis. 

The heading does not cover video cameras used for these purposes (heading 85.25). 

(14) Cameras for microphot i graphy. 

(15) Cameras used for copy ng documents (letters, receipts, cheques, drafts, order forms, 
etc.), including those re • ording on microfilms, microfiches or other microforms or on 
sensitive paper. 

(16) Laser photoplotter fo creating latent "printed circuit board" images on 
photosensitive film, gen rally from digital formats, (which is subsequently used in the 
production of printed cir uit boards) by means of a laser beam. It is comprised of a 
keyboard, a screen (catho e ray tube), a raster image processor and an image reproducer. 

(17) Cameras used for comp sing or preparing printing plates or cylinders by photographic 
means. This apparatus m y be of considerable size and may differ considerably from the 
other types of photograph c cameras mentioned above. This group includes : 

(i) Vertical and horizonta process cameras, three-colour cameras, etc. 

(ii) Cameras which photo raph blocks of type previously set by hand or by machine. 

(iii)Apparatus to select t e primary colours in illustrations (photographs, transparencies, 
etc.), consisting essen ially of an optical device and an electronic calculator, designed 
for the production, by photographic means, of screened and corrected negatives which 
will be used in the pre aration of printing plates. 

(iv) Laser photoplotter fo creating latent images on photosensitive film, generally from 
digital formats, (e.g., :olour transparencies, which are used to reproduce digital artwork 
with continuous-tone) by means of a laser beam. To reproduce an image, the primary 
colours (cyan, mage to and yellow) are first selected, whereupon each colour is 
separately turned into asterized data by an automatic data processing machine or raster 
image processor. The ster image processor may be incorporated in the photoplotter. 

Apparatus for preparing printing plates or cylinders by a photocopying or thermocopying process are 
excluded from this heading and f in heading 84.43. Photographic enlarging or reducing apparatus fall 
in heading 90.08. 

XVIII-9006-3 



• 90.06 

(II) PHOTOGRAPHIC FLASHLIGHT APPARATUS AND FLASHBULBS 

This group covers photographic flashlight apparatus and flashbulbs which are used for 
professional or amateur photography, in photographic laboratories or in photogravure work. 

These devices produce very bright light for a very short duration (flash) and are thus 
distinguished from photographic lighting equipment of heading 94.05. 

Photographic flashlighting can be obtained either by means of electrically or mechanically 
ignited devices or by means of discharge lamps (see Explanatory Note to heading 85.39). 

Included here are : 

(1) Separate flashbulbs. 

In these the light is produced by a chemical reaction initiated by an electric current. A 
flashbulb can be used only once. It consists of a bulb enclosing the active substance and the 

• igniting device (either a filament or electrodes). 

The most common types of flashbulbs are : 

(i) Oxygen-filled bulbs containing wire or finely shredded strip of, for example, 
aluminium, zirconium, aluminium-magnesium alloy or aluminium-zirconium alloy. 

(ii) Bulbs in which a ball of paste, consisting of one or more metal powders (e.g., 
zirconium) mixed with an oxidising agent, is attached to each of the electrodes. 

(2) Flashcubes. 

These are devices in the form of a cube containing four flashbulbs and four reflectors. Each 
bulb in the cube is ignited in turn either electrically, or mechanically by percussion of an 
explosive material. 

(3) Battery flashlamps. 

Such lamps are fitted with an electric battery and an electrically ignited flashbulb or 
flashcube, and are usually operated by a synchroniser in the camera shutter. 

The apparatus using discharge lamps is more complex. Whether built as a single unit or 
compnsing several elements, it usually consists of : 

(A) A mains, battery or accumulator-operated power pack; this works on the principle of the 
charge and discharge of a condenser and is usually controlled by a synchroniser 
incorporated in the camera shutter. Some types may have provision for varying the flash 
intensity and duration. 

(B) The discharge lamp with its stand and reflector. 

o 
XVIII-9006-4 



90.06 • 
(C) A control lamp. 

(D) A socket for connecting e tra flashlamps. 

Power packs without the flas amp stands and reflectors but comprising, besides the discharge 
elements, the flash release de ice and (possibly) auxiliary equipment for varying the intensity 
and duration of the flashes, f 11 in this heading as incomplete apparatus having the essential 
character of the complete appa atus. 

ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of otes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
this heading also covers part and accessories of the goods of this heading. Such parts and 
accessories include : camera odies; bellows; ball and socket mounting heads; shutters and 
diaphragms; shutter (includin delayed action) releases; magazines for plates or films; lens 
hoods, specialised stands or b ses for forensic photography to which a camera is fitted (these 
often include discharge lamps and an adjustable calibrated mast for varying the height of the 
camera). 

On the other hand, monopo . s, bipods, tripods and similar articles are, however, excluded 
(heading 96.20). 

* * 

The heading does not apply to apparatus consisting of an instrument equipped to record images by 
photographic means, but essenti lly designed for some other purpose, e.g., a telescope, microscope, 
spectrograph, stroboscope. A ca era presented separately, however, even if it is a specialised part of 
another instrument (telescope, mi roscope, spectrograph, photo-theodolite, stroboscope, etc.) is classified 
in this heading and not as a part o that instrument. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Halftone or similar printing s reens (headings 37.05, 90.01, 90.02, etc., as the case may be). 

(b) Photocopying or thermocopy ng apparatus (heading 84.43). 

(c) Digital cameras (heading 85. 5). 

(d) Digital camera backs (headi g 85.29). 

(e) Electric flashlight discharge 1 mps (heading 85.39). 

(f) Photographic enlargers and r ducers of heading 90.08. 

(g) Electron diffraction apparatu (heading 90.12). 

(h) Photographic rangefinders heading 90.15), exposure meters (heading 90.27), whether or not 
designed to be mounted on c eras. 

X-ray diffraction cameras (us d in conjunction with X-ray apparatus for the examination of crystals), 
radiography apparatus (headi g 90.22). 

XVIII-9006-5 



• 90.07 

90.07 - Cinematographic cameras and projectors, whether or not incorporating sound 
recording or reproducing apparatus. 

9007.10 - Cameras 

9007.20 - Projectors 

- Parts and accessories : 

9007.91 - - For cameras 

9007.92 - - For projectors 

This heading covers : 

(A) Cinematographic cameras (including cameras for cinephotomicrography). They are 
similar in principle to the photographic cameras of heading 90.06, but they have specialised 

• features enabling them to take a series of pictures in rapid succession. 

(B) Cinematographic cameras for recording both image and sound on the same film. 

(C) Cinematographic projectors which are static or portable apparatus for the diascopic 
projection of moving pictures whether or not having a sound track on the same film. They 
have an optical system which consists essentially of a light source, reflector, condenser and 
projection lens. The projectors also have a mechanism, generally consisting of a maltese 
cross movement, which draws the film intermittently past the optical system, usually at the 
same rate as the film was taken, and the light source is cut off when the film is being 
moved through the projection gate. The light source in cinema projectors is commonly an 
electric arc-lamp, but filament lamps may be used in some projectors. Cinematographic 
projectors may be equipped with a device to rewind the film and with a fan. Some 
projectors may be equipped with a refrigerated water cooling system. 

The heading includes special types of cinematographic projectors, for example, projectors 
which project magnifications of varying degree on to an optically flat surface to permit a 
scientific study of photographed phenomena. "Frames" may be examined singly or 
continuously at varying numbers of frames per second. On the other hand "animated" 
viewers, specially designed for editing films, are excluded (heading 90.10). 

Cinematographic projectors may be combined with sound recording or reproducing 
apparatus, these being equipped with a reader which incorporates a photoelectric sound-
head and a charge-coupled device. The sound tracks for most commercial films are printed 
in dual format, i.e., analogue and digital. The analogue format sound tracks are printed 
between the frames and the sprocket perforations whereas digital format sound tracks are 
printed either on the edges of the film, outside the sprocket perforations, or between the 
sprocket perforations. Some commercial films are printed with an analogue sound track 
and digital timecode information only on the edges of the film, where the digital sound 
track is not printed on the film but is recorded separately on a CD-ROM. As the film passes 
through the reader the photoelectric sound-head reads the analogue sound track and the 
charge-coupled device reads the digital sound track, or in the latter case the timecode 
information to ensure synchronisation of sound from the CD-ROM with the projected 
moving pictures. The printing of dual format sound tracks enables sound to be reproduced 
if one of the sound track formats is damaged or where the sound reproducing apparatus 
does not have dual format reading capability. 

• 
XVIII-9007-1 



• 90.10 

(IJ) Dry-mounting presses for photographic use. 

(K) Specialised machines and apparatus used in cinematographic laboratories, such as : 

(1) Film developing machines whether or not automatic. 

(2) Film slitting or cutting machines (e.g., for cutting 35 mm film into two 16 mm 
films). 

(3) Printing machines and cinematographic reducers and enlargers (optical 
printers). 

(4) Optical effects machines. 

(5) Sound control units for editing and synchronising sound films. 

(6) Recording apparatus which reproduces on a paper strip a "slowed down" and 
enlarged image of the sound track on a film, for use in synchronising and dubbing. 

(7) Film cleaning machines; machines for treating worn negatives before 
reprinting; combined cleaning and treatment machines; machines for cleaning 
negatives. 

(8) Waxing machines for depositing a thin coat of wax on both edges of the 
emulsion-coated side of the film. 

(9) Joiners (splicers) (hand- or pedal-operated, etc.). 

(10) Film editing units. These may be fitted with a picture-head and a sound-head. Such 
apparatus may be used, for example, to synchronise images with a sound track. 

Separately presented picture-heads, and devices equipped with sound-heads which 
are used together with frame viewers on synchronisation tables, also fall in this 
heading. However, separately presented sound-heads are excluded 
(heading 85.22). 

(11) Machines for numbering copies of films by perforation. 

(12) Editing desks for handling films; these are fitted with spool rewinders. Special film 
re-winders for winding negatives (e.g., after printing); film measurers and footage 
counters, to check the length of films (separately presented counter mechanisms are 
excluded, see heading 90.29). 

(13) Film titling apparatus. 

(14) Film viewers for editing printed cinematographic film. These viewers may be 
combined with sound recording or reproducing apparatus. 

(L) Film viewers for still images used to examine photographic negatives in photographic 
laboratories. 

(M) Specialised equipment used in reproduction work (not being photocopying apparatus 
of heading 84.43), e.g., apparatus for developing specially sensitised paper by the 
ammonia vapour process. 

XVIII-9010-2 



90.10 • 
(II) NEGATOSCOPES 

Negatoscopes are used mainl for examining medical radiographs or radiophotographs. They 
may be of very different pes, ranging from wall-mounted light boxes to automatic 
magazine-fed radiograph vie ers. 

III) PROJECTION SCREENS 

These screens are used in cin as, schools, lecture rooms, etc. They include projection screens 
for three-dimensional presen ation; also portable screens, rolled in sheaths or contained in 
boxes, for mounting on tripod , on tables, or for hanging from the ceiling. 

They are often made of a fab *c coated white, silver or with glass grains (microspheres), or of 
sheets of plastics; these fab cs or sheets are generally perforated. To fall in this heading, 
however, they must be clearl identifiable (e.g., by means of hems or rims, eyelet-holes). 

ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of otes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories identifia le as being solely or principally for use with the apparatus and 
equipment of this heading also fall here. 

This heading also excludes : 

(a) Photographic (including cine atographic) studio equipment, such as lighting apparatus, reflectors, 
spotlights, electric lighting la ps and tubes of all kinds, sound effect equipment, microphone booms, 
scenery, etc.; these fall in thei respective headings. 

(b) Halftone or similar printing s reens (headings 37.05, 90.01, 90.02, etc. as the case may be). 

(c) Paper or paperboard cutting achines of all kinds (heading 84.41). 

(d) Apparatus for the projection or drawing of circuit patterns on sensitized semiconductor materials 
(heading 84.86). 

(e) Loudspeakers, microphones a d audio-frequency electric amplifiers, other than those presented with 
and forming an integral part o any of the instruments of this heading (heading 85.18). 

(0 Cameras for recording docum nts on microfilm, microfiche or other microforms (heading 90.06). 

(g)  X-ray fluorescent and intensi mg screens (heading 90.22). 

(h)  Exposure calculating discs an rulers (heading 90.17); exposure meters, photometers, densitometers, 
colour temperature meters (he ding 90.27). 

Hand-operated stamps for n  bering prints (heading 96.11). 

XVIII-9010-3 



• 90.11 

90.11 - Compound optical microscopes, including those for photomicrography, 
cinephotomicrography or microprojection. 

9011.10 - Stereoscopic microscopes 

9011.20 - Other microscopes, for photomicrography, cinephotomicrography or 
microprojection 

9011.80 - Other microscopes 

9011.90 - Parts and accessories 

Whereas magnifiers of heading 90.13 have only a single stage of magnification of relatively 
low power, the compound optical microscope of this heading has a second stage of 
magnification for the observation of an already magnified image of the object. 

A compound optical microscope normally comprises : 

(I) An optical system consisting essentially of an objective designed to produce a magnified 
image of the object, and an eyepiece which further magnifies the observed image. The 
optical system usually also incorporates provision for illuminating the object from below 
(by means of a mirror illuminated by an external or an integral light source), and a set of 
condenser lenses which direct the beam of light from the mirror on to the object. 

(II) A specimen stage, one or two eyepiece-holder tubes (according to whether the microscope 
is the monocular or binocular type), and an objective-holder (generally revolving). 

The whole is fixed on a stand to which a limb or bracket and various adjusting accessories may 
be attached. 

This heading covers microscopes as used by amateurs, teachers, etc., and those for industrial use 
or for research laboratories; they remain in the heading whether or not they are presented with 
their optical elements (objectives, eyepieces, mirrors, etc.). The heading includes universal 
microscopes; polarising microscopes; metallurgical microscopes; stereoscopic microscopes; 
phase contrast and interference microscopes; reflecting microscopes, microscopes with drawing 
attachments; special microscopes for examining clock or watch jewels; microscopes with 
heating or freezing stages. 

Special purpose microscopes include : 

(1) Trichinoscopes, a type of projection microscope, used for examining pork suspected of 
threadworm. 

(2) Microscopes for measuring or checking operations in certain manufacturing processes; 
these may be of the conventional types or may be special models designed for fitting to 
machines. These appliances include comparison microscopes (for comparing the surface 
finish of precision articles with that of a standard article); co-ordinate reading microscopes 
(for locating the position of clock or watch parts); tool-makers' or other measuring 
microscopes (for checking threads, profiles, gear-cutters or cutting tool profiles, etc.); small 
portable microscopes for lacing directly on the object to be examined (for the Brinell 
hardness test, for printers type, printing blocks, etc.); centring microscopes (fitted on 
spindles of machine-tools, instead of the tool, to bring the work into the correct position 
before working); etc. 

XVIII-9011-1 



90.11 • 
Some of the last mentioned instruments (e.g., those for checking the profile of worked 
parts), may be fitted with projection devices which are usually in the form of a small 
circular screen fitted on top of the microscope. 

(3) Laboratory measuring microscopes, e.g., for measuring line separation in spectrograms. 

(4) Surgical microscopes for use by surgeons when operating on a very small portion of the 
body. Their light sources result in independent light paths which provide a three-
dimensional image. 

* * 

The heading also covers : 

(A) Microscopes for photomicrography and microscopes for cinephotomicrography. In 
addition to the visual observation of the specimen, these also permit the photographic 
recording of magnified images. Theymay . be composed either of a microsco pe 
permanently incorporatin a photographic or cinematographic camera (usually specially 
designed for this purpo ), or of a conventional microscope to which a conventional 
photographic or cinemat i graphic camera can be temporarily fixed by means of a simple 
attachment. 

Separatelypresented pho ographic or cinematographic cameras for photomicrography or 
cinephotomicrography are e eluded (heading 90.06 or 90.07, respectively). 

(B) Microscopes for microp ojection with compound magnification. These are used for the 
horizontal or vertical pro ection of images magnified by a microscope incorporated in the 
apparatus. They are equip ed with special microscopes enabling rapid change of focus, and 
are used in education, sc entific and medical demonstration rooms, technical laboratories, 
etc. 

ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of otes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories identifia s le as being solely or principally for use with microscopes are also 
classified here. These include : 

Stands (brackets, bases, etc. ; eyepiece-holder tubes and revolving objective-holder tubes 
(whether or not with lense ); specimen stages (including heating or freezing stages); 
specimen-guides; optical atta ments enabling the image to be sketched; diaphragm-adjusting 
levers; etc. 

* 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Specimen slides or covers, o glass (heading 70.17). 

(b) Ophthalmic binocular-type croscopes (heading 90.18). 

(c) Prepared slides for microsco is study (heading 90.23). 

(d) Microtomes; refractometers ( eading 90.27). 

(e) Profile projectors and other pparatus with optical devices for checking mechanical parts, not being 
microscopes or microproje tion apparatus, e.g., optical comparators, measuring benches, etc. 
(heading 90.31). 

XVIII-90 1 1 -2 



•	 90.12 

90.12 - Microscopes other than optical microscopes; diffraction apparatus. 

9012.10 - Microscopes other than optical microscopes; diffraction apparatus 

9012.90 - Parts and accessories 

This heading includes : 

(A) Electron microscopes differ from optical microscopes in that they use a beam of electrons 
instead of light rays. 

The normal type of electron microscope is an assembly of the following devices usually 
enclosed in a common frame as a unit : 

(1) A device (known as an electron gun) for emitting and accelerating the electrons. 

(2) A system (playing the part of the optical system of an ordinary microscope) consisting 
of electrostatic or electromagnetic "lenses' (which are respectively electrically charged 
plates or coils carrying a current); these act as condenser, objective and projector. There 
is usually also a further so-called field "lens", between the objective and the projector, 
which serves to vary the range of magnification while not altering the scope of the 
scanned field. 

(3) The specimen stage. 

(4) The vacuum pump unit which maintains a vacuum in the electron tube; these are 
sometimes self-contained units connected to the appliance. 

(5) The elements for visual observation on a fluorescent screen and for photographic 
recording of the image. 

(6) Control stands and panels bearing the elements controlling and regulating the electron 
beam. 

This heading also includes scanning electron microscopes in which a very fine beam of 
electrons is directed repeatedly onto different points of the sample. Information is obtained 
by measuring, for example, the electrons transmitted, the secondary electrons emitted, or 
the optical rays. The result may then be displayed on a monitor screen which can be 
incorporated in the microscope. 

The electron microscope has many uses both in the field of pure science (biological or 
medical research, composition of matter, etc.), and in industrial technique (examination of 
fumes, dust, textile fibres, colloids, etc.; examination of the structure of metals, paper, etc.). 

(B) Proton microscopes. In place of electrons, these employ protons which have a wavelength 
40 times shorter than the former. A correspondingly higher separating power is thus 
obtained and this permits the production of even more highly magnified images. 

The structure and functioning of the proton microscope do not differ appreciably from 
those of the electron microscope; the electron gun is replaced by a proton gun and the 
source used is hydrogen. 

XVIII-9012-1 



90.12 • 
(C) Electron diffraction app ratus. By means of a beam of electrons directed at a specimen, 

these produce diffraction atterns which are photographed. The dimensions, orientation and 
atomic arrangement of th crystals of the specimen examined can be calculated from the 
diameter, intensity and sharpness of the rings in the pattern. 

This apparatus, which is chiefly used for studies on corrosion, lubrication, catalysis, etc., 
does not differ appreciab y in principle from an electron microscope, and has the same 
essential elements (electr gun, cathode-ray tube, electro-magnetic coils, specimen holder, 
etc.). Moreover it should e noted that certain electron microscopes may be equipped with 
a diffraction chamber and can therefore perform a double function (visual examination and 
production of a diffractio pattern). 

* * 

ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Motes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with microscopes, other than optical 
microscopes, or diffraction ap aratus are also classified here; examples are the frame and its 
constituent chambers and the s ecimen stage. On the other hand, the heading excludes vacuum 
pumps (heading 84.14), elec ical equipment (batteries, rectifiers, etc.) (Chapter 85), and 
electrical measuring instrumen s (voltmeters, milliammeters, etc.) (heading 90.30). 

XVIII-9012-2 



• 90.13 

90.13 - Liquid crystal devices not constituting articles provided for more specifically in 
other headings; lasers, other than laser diodes; other optical appliances and 
instruments, not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter. 

9013.10 - Telescopic sights for fitting to arms; periscopes; telescopes designed to form 
parts of machines, appliances, instruments or apparatus of this Chapter or 
Section XVI 

9013.20 - Lasers, other than laser diodes 

9013.80 - Other devices, appliances and instruments 

9013.90 - Parts and accessories 

In accordance with Chapter Note 5, measuring or checking optical appliances, instruments and 
machines are excluded from this heading and fall in heading 90.31. Chapter Note 4, however, 
classifies certain refracting telescopes in this heading and not in heading 90.05. It should, 
moreover, be noted that optical instruments and appliances can fall not only in headings 90.01 
to 90.12 but also in other headings of this Chapter (in particular, heading 90.15, 90.18 or 
90.27). This heading includes : 

• (1) Liquid crystal devices consisting of a liquid crystal layer sandwiched between two sheets 
or plates of glass or plastics, whether or not fitted with electrical connections, presented in 
the piece or cut to special shapes and not constituting articles described more specifically in 
other headings of the Nomenclature. 

(2) Lasers. These produce or amplify electro-magnetic radiation in the wavelength range 
between 1 nanometre and 1 millimetre (ultra-violet, visible light and infra-red regions of 
the spectrum), by the process of controlled stimulated emission. When the lasing medium 
(e.g., crystals, gases, liquids, chemical products) is excited by the light from an electric 
source or by the reaction from another source of energy, the light beams which are 
produced inside the lasing medium are repeatedly reflected and amplified in such a way 
that a coherent light beam (visible or invisible) is emitted from one end which is partly 
transparent. 

In addition to the lasing medium, the energy source (pumping system) and the resonant 
optical cavity (reflector system), i.e., the basic elements combined in the laser head 
(possibly with Fabry-Perot interferometers, interference filters and spectroscopes), lasers 
generally also incorporate certain auxiliary components (e.g., a power supply unit, a 
cooling system, a control unit and, in the case of the gas laser, a gas supply system or, in 
the case of liquid lasers, a tank, fitted with a pump for the dye solutions). Some of these 
auxiliary components may be contained in the same housing as the laser head (compact 
laser) or may take the form of separate units, connected to the laser head by cables, etc. 
(laser system). In the latter case the units are classified in this heading provided they are 
presented together. 

Lasers are classified in this heading not only if they are intended to be incorporated in 
machines or appliances but also if they can be used independently, as compact lasers or 
laser systems, for various purposes such as research, teaching or laboratory examinations, 
for example, laser pointers. 

XVIII-9013-1 



90.13 • 
However, the heading excl des lasers which have been adapted to perform quite specific functions 
by adding ancillary equipm nt consisting of special devices (e.g., work-tables, work-holders, means 
of feeding and positionin workpieces, means of observing and checking the progress of the 
operation, etc.) and which therefore, are identifiable as working machines, medical apparatus, 
control apparatus, measuri apparatus, etc. Machines and appliances incorporating lasers are also 
excluded from the headin . Insofar as their classification is not specified in the Nomenclature, they 
should be classified with t machines or appliances having a similar function. Examples include : 

(i) Machine-tools for wor ing any materials by removal of material by laser (e.g., metal, glass, 
ceramics or plastics) (h ading 84.56). 

(ii) Laser soldering, brazin or welding machines and apparatus, whether or not capable of cutting 
(heading 85.15). 

(iii) Instruments for levellin (aligning) pipes by means of a laser beam (heading 90.15). 

(iv) Laser apparatus speci . lly used for medical purposes(e.g., in ophthalmological operations) 
(heading 90.18). 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter, parts and accessories for lasers, 
for example, laser tubes, e also classified in this heading. However, this heading does not 
include electric flash la ps used forpumping, such as xenon lamps, iodine lamps and 
mercury vapour lamps ( eading 85.39), laser diodes (heading 85.41) and laser crystals 
(e.g., rubies), laser mirror and lenses (heading 90.01 or 90.02). 

(3) Hand magnifying glasse and magnifiers (e.g., pocket type or those for office use), and 
thread counters (these m gnifiers may be fitted or combined with an illuminating lamp, 
they remain in this hea I 1 ng if the lamp enhances the use of the magnifier); binocular 
magnifying glasses (gen rally on supports) which, unlike stereoscopic microscopes of 
heading 90.11, are fitted ith eyepieces but not with an objective. 

(4) "Door-eyes" for viewing ough doors; also similar articles fitted with an optical system. 

(5) Telescopic sights for w apons, refracting or reflecting, presented separately; optical 
devices suitable for use ith arms and mounted thereon or presented with the firearms on 
which they are designed to be mounted, are classified with the arm, see Note 1 (d) to 
Chapter 93. 

(6) Telescopes of a kind de igned to form parts of instruments of other headings of this 
Chapter (e.g., telescope forming parts of surveying instruments) or of machines of 
Section XVI. 

(7) Fibrescopes for industr al use. Fibrescopes for medical purposes (endoscopes) are 
excluded (heading 90.18 

(8) Stereoscopes, including and-operated stereoscopes, for three-dimensional viewing of 
coloured photographic di ositives, consisting of a case of plastics incorporating two fixed 
lenses and a lever-oper ed revolving mechanism (to change the pictures which are 
mounted in sets on each i terchangeable revolving disc). 

(9) Kaleidoscopes, other tha toy kaleidoscopes (Chapter 95). 

(10) Magnifying periscopes f r submarines or tanks; and non-magnifying periscopes (e.g., for 
trenches). 

XVIII-9013-2 



90.13 

(11) Mounted glass mirrors, o tically worked, which are unsuitable for fitting to 
instruments or papa ratus for example, certain rear-view mirrors, chimney or drain 
inspection mirrors, and special mirrors for wind-tunnel observations). 

Rear-view or other mirrors, not optically worked (including shaving mirrors, whether or not 
magnifying) are excluded (heading 70.09 or 83.06). 

(12) Optical lightbeam signalling apparatus, for the long-distance transmission of optical 
signals (for example, in morse code). 

(13) Slide viewers fitted with a single magnifying lens and used for examining photographic 
slides. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of apparatus or appliances of this heading remain classified here. 

• 

• 
XVIII-9013-3 



  

90.14 • 
90.14 - Direction finding co passes; other navigational instruments and appliances. 

9014.10 - Direction coding compasses 

9014.20 - Instrumen and appliances for aeronautical or space navigation (other than 
compasses 

9014.80 - Other inst ments and appliances 

9014.90 - Parts and ccessories 

(I) D l RECTION FINDING COMPASSES 

This group covers all types f direction finding compasses, from the simple types used by 
hikers, cyclists, etc., to those pecialised for use in mining, navigation, etc., (including magnetic 
compasses, gyroscopic corn asses, gyromagnetic compasses, binnacle compasses, position 
finding compasses, etc.). 

(II) OTHER NAVI ATIONAL INSTRUMENTS AND APPLIANCES 

This group includes : 

(A) Instruments for the determination of a ship's position, such as sextants, octants, 
azimuths, etc. 

(B) Other special marine or river navigational instruments, for example : 

(1) Automatic pilots ( yro pilots). These are complex units which control the ship's 
rudder in relation to t e readings of a gyroscopic compass. 

(2) Course recording a paratus. These give an accurate record of the course (and any 
changes of course d nng a ship's journey. 

(3)  Inclinometers; for Measuring rolling. 

(4) Logs. These indicate the speed of a ship by measuring the apparent distance covered in 
a given time. Nowacks, these instruments are always automatic. One type operates by 
means of a screw r propeller (a screw is mounted in the ship's stream and is 
connected to a dial n board the ship). Another type is based on the principle of 
differential pressur , the pressure varying according to the speed of the stream (they 
generally comprise a Pitot tube); the distance and speed is read on a dial on board the 
ship. 

The heading also co ers logs incorporating a counter which records the number of 
times an electric cir uit is broken (i.e., the number of revolutions of the log), thus 
showing the distance covered by the ship. 

(5)  Sounding leads (hand leads and winch-operated deep-sea leads), which determine the 
depth of the water and the nature of the sea bed. 

(6) Echo sounding instruments. An audible echo returned by the sea bed is detected on 
board ship by a veryensitive microphone, and read on a galvanometer. 

(7) Ultrasonic sounding or detecting equipment, for example, asdic, sonar or the like, 
used for normal sounding operations, for mapping the sea bed, for detecting 
submarines, wrecks, hoals of fish, etc. 

XVIII-9014-1 



90.14 

(C) Special instruments for air navigation, such as : 

(1) Altimeters. A type of barometer calibrated in height units and based on the fact that 
atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude. 

(2) Air speed indicators. These overate by differential pressure measurements of the 
aircraft's slipstream, and show tie speed of the aircraft in relation to the surrounding 
air. 

(3) Climbing or diving speed indicators. These show the vertical speed of descent or 
ascent of the aircraft, by means of a differential pressure gauge. 

(4) Artificial horizons or gyro-horizons and turning and banking indicators. These are 
based on gyroscopic principles, the former indicating the angle of the aircraft by 
reference to the transversal or longitudinal axis, and the latter by reference to the 
vertical axis. 

(5) Mach-meters. These indicate the ratio between the air speed and the local speed of 
sound. The ratio is expressed as a "Mach number". 

(6) Accelerometers. These determine the maximum limit (not to be exceeded) of the inert 
forces produced by acceleration during high-speed evolutions. 

(7) Automatic pilots. This apparatus temporarily replaces the pilot by controlling the 
equilibrium and flight of the aircraft in accordance with a pre-established setting 
(altitude, course, etc.). It consists chiefly of direct-operated or servo-motor controls 
(usually hydraulic motors which replace the pilot's movements), and of automatic 
acting apparatus (high-speed gyroscopes) which co-ordinate instrument readings and 
the action of the servo-motors. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of apparatus or appliances of this heading remain classified here. 

* * 

This heading also excludes : 

(a) Radar apparatus, radio navigational aid apparatus, e.g., global positioning system (GPS) receivers, 
and radio remote control apparatus (heading 85.26). 

(b) Pantographs and eidographs, used for course plotting in navigation (heading 90.17). 

(c) Barometers and thermometers (including reversible thermometers for underwater research) 
(heading 90.25). 

(d) Pressure gauges, liquid level indicators and other instruments of heading 90.26. 

(e) Revolution counters (heading 90.29). 

(f) Ammeters, voltmeters and other apparatus for measuring or checking electrical quantities of 
heading 90.30. 

(g) Marine chronometers and time-keepers (Chapter 91). 

XVIII-9014-2 



90.15 • 
90.15 - Surveying (includin photogrammetrical surveying), hydrographic, oceanographic, 

hydrological, meteo ological or geophysical instruments and appliances, excluding 
compasses; rangefin ers. 

9015.10 - Rangefind rs 

9015.20 - Theodolite and tachymeters (tacheometers) 

9015.30 - Levels 

9015.40 - Photogra etrical surveying instruments and appliances 

9015.80 - Other inst ments and appliances 

9015.90 - Parts and cessories 

(I) INSTRUME TS AND APPLIANCES USED IN GEODESY, 
TOPOG PHY, SURVEYING OR LEVELLING 

These are generally intende for use in the field, for example, in cartography (land or 
hydrographic maps); in the pr paration of plans; for triangulation measurements; for calculating 
the area of a piece of land; i determining heights above or below some horizontal reference 
level; and for all similar mea urements in constructional work (building roads, dams, bridges, 
etc.), in mining, in military op rations, etc. 

This group includes : 

(1) Optical or opto-electrorn theodolites (vernier reading, microscope, suspended (wall-stand 
type), universal, mini ig, etc., types), optical or opto-electronic tachymeters 
(tacheometers) (theodo rtes incorporating a rangefinder), transits, gyrotheodolites, 
compass-clinometers, si hting clinometers for use in survey or artillery, etc. 

(2) Optical levels (spirit, au i oset, telescopic, collimator, laser, etc.), generally used mounted 
on a tripod. 

(3)  Alidades (whether or no with a telescope), optical squares and cross-staffs (whether or 
not with prisms) and pan tometers (with or without sighting telescope), clinometers (with 
a collimator or sighting t lescope), used to determine gradients and inclines, mining dials, 
graphometers, heliostats r trigonometrical survey, etc. 

(4) Plane tables, land ch ins and other special measures for surveying (including 
band-measures specialise thereto, winch-type measures for mine-shafts, etc.), pickets or 
ranging poles, whether or not graduated (of metal, wood, etc.), levelling staves 
(self-reading, telescopic, folding, etc.), electromagnetic distance measuring equipment 
(EDM) reflector prisms a d poles. 

This heading does not cover : 

(a) Global positioning system S) receivers (heading 85.26). 

(b) Measuring instruments cons sting of a steel band, waterproof tape, etc., and similar unspecified 
devices for taking linear mea urements (heading 90.17). 

(c) Revolution counters, mileom ters and the like (heading 90.29). 
(d) Levels (air bubble type, etc.) used in building or constructional work (e.g., by masons, carpenters or 

mechanics), and plumb-lines heading 90.31). 

XVIII-9015-1 



90.15 

(II) PHOTOGRAMMETRICAL INSTRUMENTS AND APPLIANCES 

These are mainly used for plotting topographic, archaeologic, etc., maps, but they are also used 
for other purposes (e.g., study of tides, ground-swells, etc.). The maps, etc., are plotted from 
photographs or digital- images taken from two different viewpoints a known distance apart, 
which must then be "restituted" (to obtain accurate information in respect of the shape, size and 
co-ordinates of objects in the image or photograph). 

This apparatus consists essentially of : 

(1) The "erecting" apparatus consisting mainly of a projector (with a light source), a 
negative-carrier, an objective and a projection table. This apparatus enables the scale to be 
changed, and it can also photographically correct negatives of aerial photographs which, in 
practice, contain errors in perspective, etc., due to variations in the terrain. 

(2) Restitution apparatus (stereoplotting apparatus or photogoniometers) also called 
stereotopographs, stereoplanigraphs, "autographs", stereoplotters, stereocomparators, etc. 
These are complex apparatus used to plot the planigraphic details and contour lines 
constituting a map or plan, this operation generally being done continuously and without 
separate calculation. 

(3) Co-ordinatographs of the type used with restitution apparatus; these bear the map on 
which the pencil controlled by the stereotopograph or the stereoplanigraph traces its 
indications. 

(4) Analytical stereomeasuring systems which consist of an optomechanical apparatus, 
operated photogrammetrically, and a programmed calculator. These systems are used for 
visual or analytical interpretation of photographic or digital images. 

But the heading excludes aerial survey photographic cameras (heading 90.06), and co-ordinatographs not 
designed for photogrammetric uses (heading 90.17). 

(III) HYDROGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTS 

Hydrography is the scientific description and plotting of water courses, depths, tide levels, etc. 
The majority of the instruments used for such purposes are, therefore, covered by the previous 
paragraphs. 

(IV) OCEANOGRAPHIC OR HYDROLOGICAL INSTRUMENTS 

(1) Special level recorders, for recording fluctuations in the level of lakes or rivers; they 
consist essentially of a float and recorder. 

(2) Bucket-wheel current meters and hydrometric paddle-wheels, for measuring the speed 
of currents in rivers, canals, etc. 

(3) Swell or tide recorders. 

Industrial instruments based on the same working principles as the instruments described in 
paragraphs (IV) (1) and (2) above (e.g., liquid level indicators, flow meters, etc.) are, however, excluded 
(heading 90.26). 

XVIII-9015-2 



1 

90.15 

(V) METEOROLOGICAL INSTRUMENTS 
It should be noted that this group does not cover thermometers, barometers, hygrometers and 
psychrometers, nor combinationof such instruments (heading 90.25). 

The group does, however, inc ude the following : 

(1)  Wind direction indicat rs, whether or not fitted with dials. 
t

(2)  Anemometers, i.e., me eorological instruments for measuring windspeed. One type 
consists of a rotor carry g three cup-shaped blades mounted on a vertical axis, readings 
being obtained by a cou ter. The other most common type consists of a kind of weather 
vane fitted with a tube i which the wind pressure is measured by a differential pressure 
gauge graduated in spee units. The group also covers anemometers in which a generator 
produces a fluctuating v ltage which is then indicated on a voltmeter calibrated in wind 
speed. 

It should be noted that sp cial types of anemometers, for measuring the speed of air currents in 
mines, tunnels, chimneys,	 aces or other air passages, consisting essentially of a special type of 
fan and a dial, are excluded (heading 90.26). 

Evaporation meters (Pi he, evaporation balance types, etc.). 

Sunshine recorders (gla s sphere, sensitised paper types, etc.). 

Nephoscopes, for indicating the speed and direction of movement of clouds. 

Ceilometers, for determining the height of the cloud ceiling above the earth by indicating 
the angular elevation of a spot of light formed where a strong beam of light meets the cloud 
so that the height may be computed automatically by triangulation. 

Visibility meters, for easuring meteorological visibility or the capability of air to 
transmit light. 

Rain gauges and indica rs, for measuring rainfall in a particular place. The simplest type 
consists of a funnel of known diameter fixed to a receptacle to collect the rain which is then 
measured in a calibrated tube. 

Actinometers, solarimeters and pyrheliometers, for measuring the intensity of solar rays 
or the total radiation received from the sky. 

It should, however, be noted that the heading excludes simple or combined thermometers used for 
the same purpose (heading 0.25). 

(10) Aerological sounding a paratus (radio-sonde or radio-wind apparatus) for suspending 
from a balloon or par chute. Such apparatus consist of instruments (thermometer, 
barometer and hygromet r) for high altitude research work, combined with a wireless 
transmitter enabling the • strument readings to be automatically recorded on the ground. 
When separately presente , the balloons and parachutes are excluded (Chapter 88). 

(11) Theodolites for recordin successive positions of sounding balloons. 

XVIII-9015-3 



• 90.15 

(VI) GEOPHYSICAL INSTRUMENTS 

Many geophysical instruments are excluded, for example, gas, sludge or soil analysis apparatus, 
photoelectric fluorometers and fluoroscopes (instruments using ultra-violet light to detect or identify 
numerous substances) (heading 90.27); electric or electronic measuring instruments (e.g., instruments for 
measuring resistivity, radioactivity counters, thermocouple instruments) (heading 90.30), etc. 

The following remain in this heading : 

(1) Seismometers and seismographs, for recording the time, duration and intensity of 
movements of a point on the earth's crust, and seismometers and seismographs used both 
for recording the various phenomena occurring during earthquakes, and in prospecting for 
mineral oil. In these instruments the seismic waves set up by an earthquake, or by the firing 
of an explosive charge, are converted into electric impulses. 

(2) Magnetic or gravimetric geophysical instruments used in prospecting for ores, oil, etc. 
These highly sensitive instruments include magnetic balances, magnetometers, magnetic 
theodolites and gravimeters, torsion balances. 

(3) Electronic magnetic gradiometers (also known as "proton magnetometers") which 
measure the gradient of the earth's magnetic field. 

(4) Circumferential acoustic scanning tools which create a "picture" of a borehole by 
measuring the acoustic travel time of an ultrasonic signal emitted from a rotating 
transducer in the head of the tool. 

(5) Apparatus for measuring the inclination of a borehole. 

(VII) RANGEFINDERS 

This group covers all types of optical or opto-electronic rangefinders for determining the 
distance between the instrument and a given object. They are used in surveying, photography 
and cinematography, by the armed forces, etc. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
this heading also covers parts and accessories of the goods of this heading. Such parts and 
accessories include arrows for land chains. 

On the other hand, monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles, even though specially designed for 
instruments or appliances of this heading, are excluded (heading 96.20). 

XVIII-9015-4 



90.16 • 
90.16 - Balances of a sensivi of 5 cg or better, with or without weights. 

This heading covers balanc s of all types, including electronic balances, provided their 
sensitivity is 5 cg or better Weights presented with such balances fall in this heading, but 
weights presented separately, even if made of precious metal, are excluded (heading 84.23). 

Many of the balances of this heading are designed for precision measurement and are made of 
non-corrosive metal or of lig t alloys, with knife-edges, bearings and planes of agate. To protect 
the balances from air current and dust, they may be enclosed in a glass or plastics case or built 
in a cabinet consisting chiefl of glass or plastics; they are then manipulated by handles and 
other devices outside the c binet. They may also be fitted with an optical device (e.g., 
magnifying lens), be artificially illuminated to assist in reading the scale, or be fitted with 
levelling devices (tripod, adjuStable screws, spirit-level, etc.). 

In certain torsion balances, he weight to be measured is counterbalanced by the torsion of a 
wire. 

Certain electronic balances re used in a vacuum or under controlled pressure, to record the 
variations in weight of substa ces submitted to special treatment (heating, cooling, the action of 
a gas, vacuum treatment, exp sure to light, etc.). Weight variations are measured by recording 
the current passing through a agnetic balancing coil. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Analytical balances (e. ., microchemical balances, microbalances, aperiodic analytical 
balances) used mainly in quantitative chemical analysis. 

(2) Assay balances, used in he assaying of precious metals. 

(3) Balances for precious st nes, graduated in carats. 

(4) Chemists' balances, ya i n balances, samples balances (used to establish the weight of 
paper, textile fabrics, etc. • 

(5) Hydrostatic (or specific gravity) balances, for ascertaining the specific gravity of liquids 
or solids. 

'PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of otes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories (includi mounted or unmounted agate knife-edges, bearings and planes), 
identifiable as being suitable or use solely or principally with the balances of this heading are 
also classified here (for exam le, beams, trays, cabinets, dials, swing dampers). 

On the other hand, monopods, bi ods, tripods and similar articles, even though specially designed for the 
apparatus of this heading, are exc uded (heading 96.20). 

* * 

Balances of a sensitivity poorer t an 5 cg are excluded (heading 84.23). 

XVIII-9016-1 



• 90.17 

90.17 Drawing, marking-out or mathematical calculating instruments (for example, 
drafting machines, pantographs, protractors, drawing sets, slide rules, disc 
calculators); instruments for measuring length, for use in the hand (for example, 
measuring rods and tapes, micrometers, callipers), not specified or included 
elsewhere in this Chapter. 

9017.10 - Drafting tables and machines, whether or not automatic 

9017.20 - Other drawing, marking-out or mathematical calculating instruments 

9017.30 - Micrometers, callipers and gauges 

9017.80 - Other instruments 

9017.90 - Parts and accessories 

This heading includes drawing, marking-out or mathematical calculating instruments. It also 
includes instruments for measuring length, for use in the hand. 

This heading does not, however, include : 

(a) Mitre boxes and tools used in the graphic arts (e.g., chisels, gouges, etching needles) (Chapter 82). 

(b) Graphic tablets and digitizers (heading 84.71). 

(c) Pattern generating apparatus designed to produce masks and reticles from photoresist coated 
substrates (such as optical, E-beam, focused ion beam, X-ray or laser beam apparatus) 
(heading 84.86). 

(d) Co-ordinatographs of a type used for photogrammetrical purposes (heading 90.15). 

These include : 

(A) Drawing instruments. 

(1) Pantographs and eidographs for smaller, larger or same scale reproductions of maps, 
plans, drawings, parts to be machined, etc. The heading includes such instruments used 
for course plotting in navigation. 

(2) Drafting machines generally using a system of parallelograms, with or without 
drawing boards or tables. 

The heading also covers drafting machines incorporating automatic data processing 
machines or working in conjunction with such machines. 

(3) Drawing compasses, dividers, reduction compasses, spring bows, mathematical 
drawing pens, dotting wheels, etc., whether in a case (e.g., drawing sets) or separately. 

(4) Set squares (standard, hatching, wood or metal working), adjustable squares, 
T squares (standard or articulated), drawing curves, rulers (flat, square, hatching 
(parallel rules), standard, etc.). 

(5) Protractors, from the ordinary protractors found in drawing sets to the complex 
protractors as used, for example, in engineering. 

XVIII-9017-1 



90.17 • 
(6) Stencils of a kind c early identifiable as being specialised as drawing instruments. 

Stencils not so specialised are classified according to their constituent material. 

(B) Marking-out instruments. 

(Marking-out consists in marking construction lines, etc., on the surface of a part to be 
machined, sawn, etc.). 

(1) Beam compasses (marking, carpenters', etc.) with plain or divided laths. 

(2) Scribers and centre punches. 

(3) Surface plates used as a datum plane for marking-out or for checking plane surfaces, 
etc. Straight-edges nd squares (of cast iron, stone, etc.) with a true plane surface. 

(4) V-blocks and X-blo ks for supporting cylindrical workpieces. 

The heading does not co er engraving tools for working in the hand with self-contained motor 
(heading 84.67). 

(C) Mathematical calculati g instruments. 

Slide rules, disc calculators, cylindrical calculators and other calculating instruments 
based on the slide rul or other mathematical calculating principle including, for 
instance, pocket-type ad ing and subtracting devices operated by the selection of numbers 
with a stylus according o a given procedure. This group also includes rules and discs for 
calculating photographic exposure times on adjustment by reference to the condition of the 
sky, time of day, apertur setting, type of subject and sensitivity of emulsion. 

Calculating or accounting Machines, however, are excluded (heading 84.70). 

(D) Instruments for measu ing length, for use in the hand. 

These instruments are ca able of indicating the length, i.e., linear dimensions, of the object 
to be measured, for exale a line drawn or imaginary (straight or curved) on the object. 
The instruments are ther Pore capable of measuring dimensions such as diameters, depths, 
thicknesses and heights hich are indicated as a unit of length (e.g., millimetres). These 
instruments must also have characteristics (size, weight, etc.) which enable them to be held 
in the hand to carry out t e measurement. 

Instruments specially desi ned to be used permanently mounted on a stand or other support or 
connected to machines or o er apparatus by means of flexible tubing, cables, etc., to carry out the 
measurement are excluded heading 90.31). 

This group includes : 

(1) Micrometers; ins ments having a micrometric head , either of the screw- or 
screwless-type (the screwless-type incorporate a slide action and are usually 
electronic). They ar used to measure, for example, outside or inside diameters, 
thicknesses, screw t ead pitch. The measurement may be read on the screw itself, on a 
dial or on a digital display. 

(2) Callipers (vernier, dial indicating or electronic), for measuring, e.g., diameters, depths, 
thicknesses. 

XVIII-9017-2 



• 90.17 

(3) Gauges, having an adjustable measuring device. 

Gauges without adjustable devices, used only for sizing parts or checking angles, forms, etc. 
(for example, plug gauges, ring gauges), are excluded (heading 90.31). 

(4) Comparators (dial type), used to check the inside or outside tolerance of dimensions 
(e.g., reaming or rectification checks). They incorporate a measuring rod, amplifying 
dial and transmission system (rack, gear, lever, spring, pneumatic, hydraulic, etc.). 

(5) Measuring rods (plain or divided, straight or folding) and measuring tapes (e.g., 
spring rules, riband-rules, drum wound bands), including standard rods, measuring 
sticks and the like. 

The heading excludes measuring devices specially designed for surveying (land chains, 
levelling staves, ranging poles, etc.) and winch-type measures for mine shafts (heading 90.15). 

(6) Divided scales (school rulers, etc.), including V-shaped rules for measuring the 
diameter of convex bodies and vertical measuring apparatus with movable crossheads. 

(7) Map measurers (opisometers); small instruments with or without a dial, used for 
measuring distances on maps, plans, etc. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
the heading also covers parts and accessories identifiable as being suitable for use solely or 
principally with the machines, apparatus and instruments described above, e.g., micrometer 
extension anvils; stands for slip gauges; micrometer stands; hinges or joints for folding rules. 

XVIII-9017-3 



90.18 • 
90.18 - Instruments and ap lances used in medical, surgical, dental or veterinary sciences, 

including scintigrap is apparatus, other electro-medical apparatus and sight-testing 
instruments (+). 

- Electro-di gnostic apparatus (including apparatus for functional exploratory 
examinati  ii n or for checking physiological parameters) : 

9018.11 - - Electro-• rdiographs 

9018.12 - - Ultrason scanning apparatus 

9018.13 - - Magneti s resonance imaging apparatus 

9018.14 - - Scintigra hic apparatus 

9018.19 - - Other 

9018.20 - Ultra-viol t or infra-red ray apparatus 

- Syringes, eedles, catheters, cannulae and the like : 

9018.31 - - Syringes with or without needles 

9018.32 - - Tubular etal needles and needles for sutures 

9018.39 - - Other 

- Other inst ments and appliances, used in dental sciences : 

9018.41 - - Dental d 11 engines, whether or not combined on a single base with other 
dental eq ipment 

9018.49 - - Other 

9018.50 - Other opht almic instruments and appliances 

9018.90 - Other inst ments and appliances 

This heading covers a very wi e range of instruments and appliances which, in the vast majority 
of cases, are used only in professional practice (e.g., by doctors, surgeons, dentists, veterinary 
surgeons, midwives), either t • make a diagnosis, to prevent or treat an illness or to operate, etc. 
Instruments and appliances for anatomical or autoptic work, dissection, etc., are also included, 
as are, under certain conditio s, instruments and appliances for dental laboratories (see Part (II) 
below). The instruments of e heading may be made of any material (including precious 
metals). 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Sterile catgut and other ste le material for surgical sutures, sterile laminaria and sterile laminaria 
tents (heading 30.06). 

(b) Diagnostic or laboratory rea ents of heading 38.22. 

(c) Hygienic or pharmaceutical ides of heading 40.14. 

(d) Laboratory, pharmaceutical r hygienic glassware of heading 70.17. 

(e) Sanitary ware of base metal in particular, headings 73.24, 74.18 and 76.15). 

(f) Manicure or pedicure sets an instruments (heading 82.14). 

(g) Carriages for disabled perso s (heading 87.13). 

(h) Spectacles, goggles and the 1 ke, corrective, protective or other (heading 90.04). 

XVIII-9018-1 



• 90.18 

(ij) Photographic cameras (heading 90.06) unless incorporated permanently in the instruments or 
appliances of this heading. 

(k) Microscopes, etc., of heading 90.11 or 90.12. 

(1) Disc calculators used for calculating lung function, body mass index, etc., of heading 90.17. 

(m) Mechano-therapy, oxygen therapy, ozone therapy, artificial respiration, aerosol therapy, massage 
apparatus, etc., of heading 90.19. 

(n) Orthopaedic appliances, artificial parts of the body and fracture appliances, including those for 
animals (heading 90.21). 

(o) X-ray apparatus, etc., (whether medical or not) of heading 90.22. 

(p) Clinical thermometers (heading 90.25). 

(q) Instruments and appliances used in laboratories to test blood, tissue fluids, urine, etc., whether or not 
such tests serve in diagnosis (generally heading 90.27). 

• (r) Medical or surgical furniture, including that for veterinary use (operating tables, examination tables, 
hospital beds), dentists' chairs not incorporating dental appliances of this heading, etc. 
(heading 94.02). 

On the other hand, this heading includes specialised measuring instruments used exclusively in 
professional practice, such as cephalometers, dividers for measuring cerebral lesions, obstetrical 
pelvimeters, etc. 

It should also be noted that a number of the instruments used in medicine or surgery (human or 
veterinary) are, in effect, tools (e.g., hammers, mallets, saws, chisels, gouges, forceps, pliers, 
spatulae, etc.), or articles of cutlery (scissors, knives, shears, etc.). Such articles are classified in 
this heading only when they are clearly identifiable as being for medical or surgical use by 
reason of their special shape, the ease with which they are dismantled for sterilisation, their 
better quality manufacture, the nature of the constituent metals or by their get-up (frequently 
packed in cases or boxes containing a set of instruments for a particular treatment : childbirth, 
autopsies, gynaecology, eye or ear surgery, veterinary cases for parturition, etc.). 

The instruments and appliances classified here may be equipped with optical devices; they may 
also make use of electricity, either as motive power or for transmission, or as a preventive, 
curative or diagnostic agent. 

This heading also covers instruments and appliances operated by laser or other light or photon 
beam processes and ultrasonic instruments and appliances. 

(I) INSTRUMENTS AND APPLIANCES 
FOR HUMAN MEDICINE OR SURGERY 

This group includes : 

(A) Instruments which may be used under the same names for several purposes, for 
example : 

(1) Needles (for sutures, ligatures, vaccination, blood tests, hypodermic needles, etc.). 

(2) Lancets (for vaccination, blood-letting, etc.). 

(3) Trocars (for puncturing) (gall-bladder, general purpose, etc., types). 

(4) Surgical knives and scalpels of all kinds. 

• 
XVIII-90 1 8-2 



90.18 • 
(5)  Sounds (prostatic, ladder, urethral, etc.). 

(6) Specula (nasal, mo th, laryngeal, rectal, vaginal, etc.). 

(7)  Mirrors and refle tors (for examination of eye, larynx, ear, etc.). 

(8)  Scissors, shears, forceps, pliers, chisels, gouges, mallets, hammers, saws, 
scrapers, spatulae. 

(9)  Cannulae, cathete s, suction tubes, etc. 

(10) Cauteries (thermo, galvano, micro, etc.). 

(11) Tweezers; dressin , swab, sponge or needle holders (including radium needle 
holders). 

(12) Retractors (lip, j a , abdominal, tonsil, liver, etc.). 

(13) Dilators (laryngeal urethral, oesophageal, uterine, etc.). 

(14) Wire guides used r the placement of catheters, needles, tissue dilators, endoscopes 
and atherectomy de ices. 

(15) Clips (suture, etc.). 

(16) Syringes (glass, m tal, glass and metal, plastics, etc.), of all kinds, e.g., injection, 
puncture, anaesthe ia, irrigation, wound washing, suction (with or without pump), 
eye, ear, throat, ute ne, gynaecological, etc. 

(17) Surgical staplers f  i r inserting staples to close a wound. 

(B) Special diagnostic instr ments and apparatus. 

These include : 

(1) Stethoscopes. 

(2) Instruments to mea ure rate of breathing (to determine basal metabolism). 

(3) Sphygmomanomete s, tensiometers and oscillometers (to measure blood pressure). 

(4) Spirometers (to ass ss lung capacity). 

(5) Cephalometers. 

(6) Pelvimeters. 

(C) Ophthalmic instrumen s. These fall into various categories : 

(1) Surgical instrumen s such as corneal trephines, keratomes. 

(2) Diagnostic instrum nts such as ophthalmoscopes; binocular loupes with head-bands 
and binocular-type icroscopes, consisting of a microscope, an electric lamp with a 
slit, and a head-res , the whole being mounted on an adjustable support, for the 
examination of the e es; tonometers (for testing the intra-ocular tension); eye specula. 

XVIII-9018-3 



• 90.18 

(3) Orthoptic or sight-testing apparatus including amblyoscopes, retinoscopes, 
skiascopes, strabometers, keratometers, keratoscopes, eye measurement meters 
designed to measure the distance between the pupils , trial-cases (of lenses) and 
trial-frames (for carrying the trial lenses), optometric scales, test charts. However, 
optometric scales and charts on paper, paperboard or plastics, used for colour 
perception tests, are excluded (Chapter 49). 

This heading also covers electrically heated compresses for the eyes, and electro-magnets 
designed for removing metallic particles from the eyes. 

(D) Ear instruments, e.g., auriscopes. However, tuning forks, whether or not for medical use, 
are excluded (heading 92.09). 

(E) Anaesthetic apparatus and instruments (face masks, face-piece harness, intratracheal 
tubes, etc.). 

(F) Instruments for nose, throat or tonsil treatment : clamps (for straightening the nasal 
cartilage); transillumination apparatus (for sinuses and nasal fossae); tonsilotomes and 

• guillotines; direct laryngoscopes; laryngeal brushes, etc. 

(G) Pharyngeal, oesophageal, stomach or tracheotomy instruments : oesophagoscopes, 
bronchoscopes, stomach pumps, intubation tubes, etc. 

(H) Urinary canal or bladder instruments : urethrotomes, lithotrity instruments, bladder-grit 
suction apparatus, instruments for prostatectomy. 

(LT) Artificial kidney (dialysis) apparatus. 

(K) Gynaecological or obstetrical instruments : vaginal retractors; hysterectomy 
instruments; obstetrical stethoscopes; specialised optical instruments for examination of 
the genital organs; forceps; perforators; embryotomy instruments (for dissection of the 
foetus); cephalotribes and cranioclasts (instruments to crush the head of a child which has 
died in the uterus); instruments for taking internal measurements; etc. 

(L) Portable pneumo-thorax apparatus, blood transfusion apparatus, artificial leeches. 

The heading also covers sterile hermetically sealed containers of plastics, from which air 
has been evacuated but containing a small quantity of anti-coagulant and fitted with an 
integral donor tube and a phlebotomy needle, used for the collection, storage and 
transfusion of human whole blood. However, special blood storage bottles of glass are 
excluded (heading 70.10). 

(M)  Chiropodists' electric grinders. 

• (N) Acupuncture needles - gold, silver, steel. 

(0) Endoscopes : gastroscopes, thoracoscopes, peritoneoscopes, bronchoscopic telescopes, 
cystoscopes, urethroscopes, resectoscopes, cardioscopes, colonoscopes, nephroscopes, 
laryngoscopes, etc. Many of these have an operating channel large enough to perform 
surgery via remotely controlled instruments. However, endoscopes for non-medical 
purposes (fibrescopes) are excluded (heading 90.13). 

(P) Apparatus incorporating an automatic data processing machine and designed solely 
for calculating the dose and distribution of therapeutic radiation. 

• 
XVIII-9018-4 



90.18 • 
(Q) Hyperbaric chambers (also known as decompression chambers) which are specially 

equipped pressure vess is to administer oxygen at elevated atmospheric pressure levels. 
They are used for the treatment of conditions such as decompression sickness, air 
embolism, gas gangrene carbon monoxide poisoning, refractory osteomyelitis, skin grafts 
and flaps, actinomycosis and exceptional blood loss anaemia. 

(R) Lamps which are spec ally designed for diagnostic, probing, irradiation, etc. purposes. 
Torches, such as those n the shape of a pen are excluded (heading 85.13) as are other 
lamps which are not clearly identifiable as being for medical or surgical use 
(heading 94.05). 

(II) DENTAL INSTRUMENTS AND APPLIANCES 

In addition to those commo to this and the previous group (such as masks and other dental 
analgesic apparatus), the mai instruments and appliances included in this category are : 

(1) Surgeons' finger-guar s (whether or not articulated) and gags; cheek or lip retractors, 
tongue depressors and lips. 

(2) Forceps of all kinds, el vators, tweezers of all kinds (to remove exposed teeth, aligning 
pivot teeth, etc.), cutter (for dissecting, dressing, filling and gouging, etc.), root forceps. 

(3) Instruments for endo ontic treatment (broaches, reamers, files, pluggers, spreaders, 
etc.). 

(4) Bone scissors and files gouges and mallets for resecting the jaw and the maxillary 
sinus; raspatories; scpels; special knives and scissors; special dentists' tweezers; 
"excavators" and prob6. 

(5) Special instruments for cleaning gums and sockets; scalers for treating dental tartar; 
scrapers and enamel chisels. 

(6) Miscellaneous probes needles (abscess, hypodermic, suture, cotton-wool, etc.); 
cotton-wool holders an swab holders; insufflators; dental mirrors. 

(7) Gold-filling instrumen s (pluggers, mallets, etc.); filling instruments (cement or resin 
spatulae, amalgam stop ers and mallets, amalgam-carriers, etc.); impression compound 
trays. 

(8) Dental burrs, discs, drills and brushes, specially designed for use with a dental drill 
engine or handpiece. 

The heading also covers tools and instruments of a kind used in prosthetic dentistry either by the 
practitioner himself or by	dental technician, for example : knives; spatulae and other 
modelling tools; miscellane s pliers and tweezers (for fixing clamps and crowns, cutting 
pivots, etc.); saws; shears; allets; files; chisels; scrapers; burnishers; metal formers, for the 
manufacture, by beating, of metal dental crowns. The heading also covers dental casting 
machines, dental milling machines, and dental trimmers for trimming models of dentures. The 
heading does not, however, nclude tools or other articles of general use (furnaces, moulds, 
soldering tools, melting ladle, etc.); these are classified in their respective headings. 

The following also fall in this heading : 

(i) Dental drill engines wi swivel arm, whether on a separate base, for wall-mounting, or 
for fitting to the equipm nt described under (ii) below. 

XVIII-9018-5 



• 90.18 

(ii) Complete dental equipment on its base (stationary or mobile unit). The main usual 
features are a frame carrying a compressor, a transformer, a control panel and other 
electrical apparatus; the following are also often mounted on the unit : swivel arm drill, 
spittoon and mouth rinser, electric heater, hot air insufflator, spray, cautery instrument tray, 
diffused lighting, shadowless lamp, fan, diathermic apparatus, X-ray apparatus, etc. 

Some types of this equipment are designed to operate by the use of abrasive materials 
(usually aluminium oxide) instead of with a dnll; the abrasives are usually projected 
against the teeth by compressed gas (e.g., carbon dioxide). 

(iii) Spittoon mouth rinsers whether on a base, stand or on swivel arms. They are usually 
combined with warm water supply and warm water syringe. 

(iv) Polymerisation devices (light or heat), amalgamators, ultrasonic scalers, electrosurgery 
equipment, etc. 

(v) Devices for dental treatment which operate by the use of lasers. 

(vi) Dentists' chairs incorporating dental equipment or any other dental appliances 
classifiable in this heading. 

The heading does not, however, include dentists' chairs not incorporating dental appliances of this 
heading; these dentists' chairs fall in heading 94.02 whether or not fitted with equipment such as lighting 
fittings. 

It should, however, be noted that the heading excludes certain items of dental equipment mentioned in 
paragraph (ii) above, when they are presented separately; these are classified in their own respective 
headings, for example, compressors (heading 84.14), X-ray, etc., apparatus (heading 90.22). 
heading 90.22 also covers X-ray, etc., apparatus designed for a separate stand, or for wall-mounting in 
dental surgeries. Separately presented diathermy apparatus is, however, classified with the 
electro-medical apparatus of this heading (see Part (IV) below). 
It should be noted that dental cements and other dental fillings fall in heading 30.06; the preparations 
known as "dental wax" or as "dental impression compounds", put up in sets, in packings for retail sale or 
in plates, horseshoe shapes, sticks or similar forms, and other preparations for use in dentistry, with a 
basis of plaster (of calcined gypsum or calcium sulphate), fall in heading 34.07. 

(III) VETERINARY INSTRUMENTS AND APPLIANCES 

This group includes a number of articles which, though designed for veterinary use, are similar 
to those of Part (I) or (II) above, for example : 

(A) General purpose instruments (e.g., needles, lancets, trocars, scalpels, specula, sounds, 
scissors, forceps, hammers, curettes, retractors, syringes). 

(B) Special instruments and appliances, such as, ophthalmoscopes, eye specula, 
laryngoscopes, stethoscopes, forceps, embryotomes. 

(C) Dental instruments. 

The group also includes instruments and apparatus specialised for veterinary use, for example : 

(1) Instruments and appliances for the udder, e.g., teat dilators and puncturing sounds (to 
open the teats of cows); appliances for treating puerperal or milk fever in cows. 

(2) Instruments and appliances for castration : emasculators; castrating clams and clamps 
(for producing atrophy of the male genital glands); castrating vices and forceps; 
ovariotomes, etc. 

(3) Instruments and appliances for parturition : specialised obstetrical cords, straps, 
head-collars, forceps and hooks, mechanical calfing aids, etc. 

XVIII-9018-6 



90.18 • 
(4) Miscellaneous instrum nts : artificial inseminators; tail-dockers; horn-cutters; sprays for 

treatment of diseases o respiratory, digestive, urinary, genital, etc., organs in animals; 
special control appara s, i.e., for preventing animals from moving during operations 
(mouth-gags, hobbles, etc.); special syringes for applying medicaments and syringes to be 
filled with an anaesthetic or a medicament (antiserum, vaccine, etc.) for remote projection 
at free-roaming animals, for example by means of a gun or pistol operated by compressed 
gas; appliances for administering pills; special snaffles for ingesting drenches; hooks for 
sand-crack (to close cracks in hooves); endoscopic instruments for determining the sex of  
chicks, etc. 

The heading excludes trichinocopes (optical instruments for examination of pork) (heading 90.11), 
orthopaedic appliances for ani Is (heading 90.21), operating tables for animals (heading 94.02, see 
corresponding Explanatory Note 

Tools of a type used equally by veterinary surgeons and blacksmiths are classified in Chapter 82 (e.g., 
toeing files; nail or hoof clipper ; paring knives; pliers; pincers; hammers, etc.); Chapter 82 also covers 
cattle-branding tools (punches, ions for burningoff hoof-rind, etc.) and shearing tools. 

(IV SCINTIGRAPHIC APPARATUS 

These are apparatus which sc n parts of the body and create images of an organ or a record of 
its functioning. It includes apparatus incorporating a scintillation counter the data from which is 
converted into analogue signals for the purpose of making medical diagnoses (e.g., gamma 
camera, scintillation scanner). 

(V) OTH R ELECTRO-MEDICAL APPARATUS 

This heading also covers e ectro-medical apparatus for preventive, curative or diagnostic 
purposes, other than X-ray, c., apparatus of heading 90.22. This group includes : 

(1) Electro-diagnostic apparatus, which include : 

(i)  Electro-cardiographs (apparatus which, by means of currents produced by 
contractions of the ardiac muscle, record heart movements as electrocardiograms). 

(ii) Phonocardiograp s (specially designed to register heart noises as 
phonocardiograms; hey may also be used as electro-cardiographs). 

(iii) Cardioscopes (used in conjunction with the two preceding instruments to enable 
simultaneous observation of cardiograms and phonocardiograms). 

(iv) Rheocardiographs (electrical apparatus for measuring changes of electrical 
resistance due to the functioning of the heart). 

(v) Electroencephalographs (for examination of the brain). 

(vi) Electrosphygmogr phs (for registering arterial pressure and volume). 

(vii) Electrotonographs (for registering variations in arterial, intravenous or intracardial 
pressure). 

(viii) Electroretinograp s (for measuring strain in the retina). 

XVIII-9018-7 



• 90.18 

(ix) Audiometers and similar apparatus (for hearing tests based on frequency 
variations). 

(x) Diagnostic apparatus incorporating or operating in conjunction with an 
automatic data processing machine for processing and visualising clinical data, etc. 

(xi) Ultrasonic diagnostic equipment used for the representation of organs, e.g., on a 
display tube, by means of ultrasonic waves. 

(xii) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) apparatus used to represent the 
characteristics of tissues and organs inside the human body, using the magnetic 
properties of body atoms, such as hydrogen atoms. 

(2) Electrotherapy apparatus. Apart from its use in diagnosis, this apparatus is employed to 
treat diseases such as neuritis, neuralgia, hemiplegia, phlebitis, endocrinal anaemia. Certain 
of these appliances can be combined with electro-surgical instruments referred to in 
paragraph (7) below. 

(3) Iono-therapy apparatus used to administer active medicaments (sodium or lithium 
salicylate, potassium iodide, histamine, etc.) through the skin by the aid of an electric 
current. 

(4) Diathermy apparatus to treat certain diseases which require heat (e.g., rheumatism, 
neuralgia, dental ailments). These operate by the use of high-frequency (shortwave, 
ultrasonic, ultra shortwave, etc.) currents, and employ electrodes in a variety of forms (e.g., 
plates, rings, tubes). 

(5) Electric shock treatment apparatus to treat mental or nervous diseases. 

(6) Cardiac defibrillators for defibrillating the heart by the application of electric current. 

(7) Electro-surgical apparatus. These utilise high-frequency electric currents, the needle, 
probe, etc., forming one of the electrodes. They can be employed to cut tissues 
(electrocutting) with a lancet (electric lancet), or to coagulate the blood 
(electrocoagulation). Certain combined instruments may, by the use of control pedals, be 
made to act interchangeably as electrocutters or electrocoagulators. 

(8) Actinotherapy apparatus. These employ radiations within, or more generally just outside, 
the visible spectrum (infra-red, ultra-violet) for treatment of certain diseases or for 
diagnostic purposes (special lighting to reveal skin diseases). This apparatus generally 
incorporates lamps, though infra-red ray apparatus may be fitted with heating resistances 
or heating panels with reflectors. 

(9) Artificial incubators for babies. Basically these consist of a transparent cubicle of 
plastics, electrical heating equipment, safety and warning devices, and oxygen and air 
filtering and regulating apparatus. In most cases they are mounted on a trolley and have 
built-in baby scales. 

Cases containing electrodes or other devices for use with the apparatus described above are also 
included in this group. 

This heading also excludes prenatal listening apparatus for non-medical use of heading 85.18 (see the 
Explanatory Note to that heading). 

XVIII-9018-8 



90.18 • 
PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of otes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of appar tus or appliances of this heading remain classified here. 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Notes 

Subheading 9018.12 

This subheading covers electro diagnostic ultrasonic scanning apparatus. This apparatus operates by 
sending high-frequency sound w yes into the human body through a transducer. The transducer is placed 
in contact with the body, and al ernately emits short pulses of ultrasound and "listens" for their echoes. 
The echoes result from the so d waves being reflected by the organs within the body, and their 
characteristics are interpreted t yield information about the location, size, shape and texture of the 
tissues. Interpretation is generall carried out by an automatic data processing machine, with the output 
being presented as a video image of the tissues. 

This method of body scanning s used for examining the foetuses of pregnant women. It is also well 
suited for the examination of the reasts, heart, liver and gall-bladder. • 
Subheading 9018.13 

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (IV [RI) relies on the principle that the nuclei of hydrogen atoms will align 
when subjected to an intense gnetic field. If a radio frequency is then aimed at these atoms, the 
alignment of the nuclei will shil . When the radio waves are turned off, the nuclei realign themselves, 
transmitting in the process a sma 1 electric signal. As the human body is primarily composed of hydrogen 
atoms, an image of virtually any area of the body can be generated from the returning pulses. Since the 
hydrogen represents water conte i it, the returning pulses can be used to make distinctions between tissues. 
This makes it possible to obtain n image of bone-marrow and tissue. 

The electro-diagnostic magnetic resonance imaging apparatus of this subheading consists of a huge 
electro-magnet, a radio-frequenc generator and an automatic data processing machine for evaluation. It 
must be installed in a room co pletely shielded from external radio-frequencies. To obtain the intense 
magnetic field required, the elect o-magnets are supercooled by means of liquid helium. 

Hydrogen was chosen as the basi for magnetic resonance imaging because of its abundance in the human 
body and its prominent magneti characteristics. It is also possible to use other elements such as, for 
example, sodium or phosphorus. 

Subheading 9018.14 

The electro-diagnostic apparatus  of this subheading is used to obtain an image of the distribution of 
gamma rays in the human bo y. This image is produced using suitable apparatus such as the 
scintigraphic scanner and, above all, the gamma camera. 

These nuclear scanners require gi ving the patient an oral dose or injection of a radioactive compound (the 
tracer) which is quickly absorber 1 by the organ being studied. The body is then scanned with a gamma 
counter, which records the amou it of radiation emitted by the tracer as it penetrates the target organ (for 
example, the brain), in order to d ,termine where the radio-isotope is absorbed. 

A video picture is produced by ai  itomatic data processing machine analysis of the radiation detected. This 
picture is a patchwork of light ai id dark areas or contrasting colours which show where in the organ the 
radio-isotope was taken up. Suc i scans provide information about both the structure and the function of 
the organ concerned. 

An example of scintigraphic app#ratus is the Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scanner. It combines 
the principles of nuclear medicine with the imaging techniques used in the Computed Tomography (CT) 
scanner (see the Subheading Exp anatory Note to subheading 9022.12). 

XVIII-9018-9 



90.19 

90.19 - Mechano-therapy appliances; massage apparatus; psychological aptitude-testing 
apparatus; ozone therapy, oxygen therapy, aerosol therapy, artificial respiration or 
other therapeutic respiration apparatus. 

9019.10 - Mechano-therapy	 appliances;	massage	apparatus;	 psychological 
aptitude-testing apparatus 

9019.20 - Ozone therapy, oxygen therapy, aerosol therapy, artificial respiration or 
other therapeutic respiration apparatus 

(I) MECHANO-THERAPY APPLIANCES 

These appliances are mainly used to treat diseases of the joints or muscles, by mechanical 
reproduction of various movements. It should be noted that such treatment is usually carried out 
under medical supervision; the apparatus of this heading should therefore be distinguished from 
the ordinary physical culture or medical exercising equipment designed for use in the home or 
in specially equipped premises (heading 95.06) (e.g., elastic cable extenders or exercisers; 
spring grips of various kinds; "rowing" machines for reproducing rowing movements; stationary 
one-wheeled cycles for training purposes or for developing leg muscles). 

Since mechano-therapy refers only to treatment involving movement of the joint, etc., this 
heading excludes wholly stationary apparatus (e.g., steps, ladders, parallel bars) even if they are 
for use in the rehabilitation of the limbs; such articles are classified in their respective headings. 
For the purposes of this heading, however, apparatus may be regarded as mechanical even if it 
incorporates only comparatively simple mechanical devices such as springs, wheels, pulleys, 
etc. 

Subject to the above conditions, the heading includes : 

(1) Apparatus for rotation exercises of the wrist. 

(2) Apparatus for rehabilitation of the fingers. 

(3) Apparatus for rotation exercises of the feet. 

Most of these three types of appliances consist mainly of grips linked to levers, adjustable 
counterweights, devices for holding the limbs, the whole mounted on a base. They are 
hand-operated. 

(4) Apparatus for simultaneous flexion and extension of the knee and hip. 

(5) Apparatus for trunk exercises. 

(6) Apparatus for walking exercises, consisting of a frame, with supporting crutches and hand 
grips, resting on a series of wheels. 

(7)  Apparatus for improving the circulation, strengthening heart muscles and rehabilitating the 
lower limbs, consisting of a kind of wheel-less cycle fixed on a frame, which can be 
pedalled when the patient is sitting up or lying down. 

(8) Universal-type apparatus, power-operated, which by the use of interchangeable accessories, 
can be employed for numerous mechano-therapeutic purposes (e.g., for treatment of 
diseases of the joints or muscles of the neck, shoulder, elbow, wrist, fingers, hip, knee, 
etc.). 

XVIII-9019-1 



90.19 • 
(II) MASSAGE APPARATUS 

Apparatus for massage of pa s of the body (abdomen, feet, legs, back, arms, hands, face, etc.) 
usually operate by friction, v ration, etc. They may be hand- or power-operated, or may be of 
an electro-mechanical type ith a motor built in to the working unit (vibratory-massaging 
appliances). The latter type particular may include interchangeable attachments (usually of 
rubber) to allow various meth ds of application (brushes, sponges, flat or toothed discs, etc.). 

This group includes simple rubber rollers or similar massaging devices. It also covers 
hydromassage appliances for 11-over or partial massage of the body, using the action of water 
or a blend of water and air der pressure. Examples of these appliances include spa baths, 
presented complete with pum s, turbines or blowers, ducts, controls and all fittings; devices for 
massaging the breasts, using t e action of water distributed by a series of small nozzles mounted 
inside a form fitted over th breast, and made to revolve by a stream of water introduced 
through a flexible tube. 

The following are also regarded as massage apparatus within the meaning of this heading : 
mattresses designed to prevelt or treat bedsores by constantly varying the places at which the 
weight of the patient's body rests and also providing a superficial massage effect on tissues 
liable to necrosis. 

(III) PSYCHOLIGICAL APTITUDE-TESTING APPARATUS • 
This is used by doctors, etc., o test the speed of reflex actions, co-ordination of movements or 
other physical or psychological reactions. It is used in particular to test people whose 
occupations demand special aptitudes (airmen, drivers, etc.), or to test the educational or 
vocational aptitudes of children. 

The heading covers various types of such apparatus (e.g., appliances for testing mechanical 
aptitudes or manual dexterity; revolving seats designed for variable speeds and abrupt stopping 
to test the reactions of aircraft pilots). 

It should, however, be noted th t the heading excludes apparatus of a kind normally used for medical 
diagnosis of sight, hearing, the heart, etc. (heading 90.18). Similarly, articles having the character of 
constructional or building sets d equally suitable for use as amusements and for aptitude testing are 
classified as games or toys (Cha ter 95). 

(IV) OZONE THERAPY APPARATUS 

This apparatus provides for he treatment of diseases of the respiratory organs by using the 
therapeutic properties of ozon (chemical formula 03), e.g., by inhaling. 

(V) OXYGE THERAPY, ARTIFICIAL RESPIRATION 
OR OTHER T ERAPEUTIC RESPIRATION APPARATUS 

These are used in cases of dro ning, electrocution, acute poisoning (e.g., carbon monoxide), for 
weak newly-born babies, post operative shock, infantile paralysis (poliomyelitis), acute asthma, 
insufficient lung development etc. 

XVIII-9019-2 



• 90.19 

These appliances include : 

(A) Appliances used instead of manual methods of artificial respiration, e.g., mechanical 
devices operating by bringing pressure to bear on the patient's chest, by a rocking 
movement, by forced inhalation, etc. 

(B) Oxygen therapy appliances proper. These operate either by inhalation of oxygen or of a 
mixture of oxygen and carbon dioxide through a mask, or by feeding oxygen into a 
respiratory chamber consisting of a tent of transparent plastics fitted to the patient's bed. 

(C) Appliances known as "iron lungs" and the like. These consist essentially of : 

(1) A chamber, made of metal, wood or glass fibre, to accommodate the patient's body (the 
head remaining outside), or a smaller chamber of transparent plastics covering only the 
chest. 

(2) An independent unit comprising an air suction system and an emergency blower which 
may be power- or hand-operated. 

(3) A thick air-tight tube connecting the blower system to the chamber. 

Certain oxygen therapy appliances described above (in particular oxygen tents) may also be 
used for administration of aerosols, the patient receiving simultaneously an inhalation of oxygen 
and a medicament dispersed as a micro-spray (see Part (VI) below). 

The heading does not include hyperbaric or decompression chambers (heading 90.18). 

(VI) AEROSOL THERAPY APPARATUS 

This is used for the application of a therapeutic agent in the treatment of pulmonary, cutaneous, 
oto-rhino-laryngologic, gynaecologic diseases, etc., by the dispersion (nebulisation) in the form 
of a mist of various medicinal solutions (hormones, vitamins, antibiotics, broncho-dilating 
preparations, essential oils, etc.). 

Some of these appliances are of the individual type (nebulisers) designed for connecting to 
cylinders of oxygen or compressed air, or for fitting to the oxygen tents described in Part (V) 
above. Others are of the aerosol generator type for doctors' consulting rooms or hospitals; these 
consist of a cabinet containing a motor-compressor unit, measuring instruments, the generator 
proper and various application devices (masks, nasal, buccal, gynaecological, etc., nozzles). 
The heading includes aerosol-type hand-sprays for spraying teeth or gums which operate by 
compressed gas contained in a screw-on cartridge; the action of the medicinal substance used 
cleans the mouth and treats diseases such as periodontitis. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of apparatus or appliances of this heading remain classified here. Such 
parts and accessories include tents and tent fixing devices for oxygen therapy apparatus. 

XVIII-9019-3 



90.20 • 
90.20 - Other breathing ap fiances and gas masks, excluding protective masks having 

neither mechanical p rts nor replaceable filters. 

( ) BREATHING APPLIANCES 

The heading includes breath' g appliances of a kind used by, for example, airmen, divers, 
mountaineers or firemen. Thee may be self-contained (where the breathing circuit is fed from a 
cylinder of oxygen or compressed air) or may be connected by a hose to compressors, 
compressed air supply pipes, storage cylinders or (in the case of certain short distance 
apparatus) the outside atmosp ere. 

This heading also includes dieters' helmets which require to be fitted to divers' suits before they 
are air-tight, and anti-radiation or anti-contamination protective suits, incorporating 
breathing apparatus. 

(II) GAS MASKS 

These enable the wearer to br ta the in atmospheres polluted by dust, poisonous vapours, smoke, 
etc., and are therefore used incertain industries, or in warfare (against poison gases). 

In these appliances air for breathing comes directly from the outside and is passed through a 
filtering device which absorbs poison gases or retains dust. They therefore consist essentially of 
a mask, with an arrangement enabling the wearer to see, a metal frame with outlet and inlet 
valves, and a socket to whit is fitted either a filter or a flexible tube connected to a filter 
system carried on the back or hest. A more simple type protects only the mouth and the nose; it 
consists of a sheath held in lace by one or more elastic ribbons, and contains a filtering or 
absorbent material (asbestos wool, sponge rubber, cotton wadding, etc., which may be 
impregnated or not) easily rep aced after use. 

The following articles are not rewarded as breathing appliances or gas masks of this heading : 

(a) Masks for protection against dust, odours, etc., not equipped with a replaceable filter, but consisting 
of several layers of bonded fibre fabric, whether or not treated with activated carbon or having a 
central layer of synthetic f bres, and masks of textile materials, used by surgeons, nurses, etc., 
operating upon or attending o a patient (heading 63.07). 

(b) Masks for protection against dust or particles of materials, consisting of a simple wire mesh sheath 
with no filtering device other than a sheet of gauze (Section XV). 

(c) Masks for administering anaesthetics (heading 90.18). 

(d) Divers' respiratory masksf a kind used without oxygen or compressed air bottles, and simple 
underwater breathing tubs (generally known as "snorkels') for swimmers or divers 
(heading 95.06). 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of otes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of appar tus or appliances of this heading remain classified here. 

XVIII-9020-1 



• 90.21 

90.21 - Orthopaedic appliances, including crutches, surgical belts and trusses; splints and 
other fracture appliances; artificial parts of the body; hearing aids and other 
appliances which are worn or carried, or implanted in the body, to compensate for a 
defect or disability. 

9021.10 - Orthopaedic or fracture appliances 

- Artificial teeth and dental fittings : 

9021.21 - - Artificial teeth 

9021.29 - - Other 

- Other artificial parts of the body : 

9021.31 - - Artificial joints 

• 9021.39 - - Other 

9021.40 - Hearing aids, excluding parts and accessories 

9021.50 - Pacemakers for stimulating heart muscles, excluding parts and accessories 

9021.90 - Other 

(I) ORTHOPAEDIC APPLIANCES 

Orthopaedic appliances are defined in Note 6 to this Chapter. These are appliances for : 

- Preventing or correcting bodily deformities; or 

- Supporting or holding parts of the body following an illness, operation or injury. 

They include : 

(1) Appliances for hip diseases (coxalgia, etc.). 

(2) Humerus splints (to enable use of an arm after resection), (extension splints). 

(3) Appliances for the jaw. 

(4) Traction, etc., appliances for the fingers. 

(5) Appliances for treating Pott's disease (straightening head and spine). 

(6) Orthopaedic footwear and special insoles designed to correct orthopaedic conditions, 
provided that they are either (1) made to measure or (2) mass-produced, presented 
singly and not in pairs and designed to fit either foot equally. 

(7) Dental appliances for correcting deformities of the teeth (braces, rings, etc.). 

• 
XVIII-9021-1 



   

90.21 • 
(8)  Orthopaedic foot ap i liances (talipes appliances, leg braces, with or without spring 

support for the foot, •urgical boots, etc.). 

(9)  Trusses (inguinal, c al, umbilical, etc., trusses) and rupture appliances. 

(10) Appliances for corre ting scoliosis and curvature of the spine as well as all medical or 
surgical corsets and elts (including certain supporting belts) characterised by : 

(a) Special pads, prings, etc., adjustable to fit the patient. 

(b) The materials kif which they are made (leather, metal, plastics, etc.); or 

(c) The presence of reinforced parts, rigid pieces of fabric or bands of various 
widths. 

The special design o these articles for a particular orthopaedic purpose distinguishes 
them from ordinary orsets and belts, whether or not the latter also serve to support or 
hold. 

(11) Orthopaedic suspenders (other than simple suspenders of knitted, netted or crocheted 
materials, etc.). • 

This group also includes crut hes and crutch-sticks. (It should, however, be noted that ordinary 
walking-sticks, even if special y made for disabled persons, are excluded (heading 66.02).) 

This group further includes alking aids known as "walker-rollators", which provide support 
for the users as they push them. They generally consist of a tubular metal frame on three or four 
wheels (some or all of which may swivel), handles and hand-brakes. "Walker-rollators" can be 
adjustable in height and can be equipped with a seat between the handles and with a wire basket 
for carrying personal items. The seat allows the user to take short rest breaks whenever 
necessary. 

The heading does not include : 

(a) Stockings for varicose veins heading 61.15). 

(b) Simple protectors or dev ces designed to reduce pressure on certain parts of the foot, 
(heading 39.26, if made o plastics, or heading 40.14, if of cellular rubber fixed on gauze with 
adhesive plaster). 

(c) Supporting belts or other support articles of the kind referred to in Note 1 (b) to this Chapter, e.g., 
pre-natal or maternity belts Generally heading 62.12 or 63.07). 

(d) Mass-produced footwear t e inner soles of which have been simply arched to alleviate 
flat-footedness (Chapter 64 

This group also covers orth paedic appliances for animals, for example, hernia trusses or 
straps; leg or foot fixation apparatus; special straps and tubes to prevent animals from 
crib-biting, etc.; prolapsus ba ds (to retain an organ, rectum, uterus, etc.); horn supports, etc. 
But it excludes protective d vices having the character of articles of ordinary saddlery and 
harness for animals (e.g., shin pads for horses) (heading 42.01). 

(II) SPLINT AND OTHER FRACTURE APPLIANCES 

Fracture appliances are used Lither to immobilise injured parts of the body (for extension or 
protection), or for setting fractures. They are also used in the treatment of dislocations and other 
joint injuries. 

• 
XV111-9021-2 



• 90.21 

Some of these articles are designed for fitting onto the patient (e.g., wire, zinc or wooden 
cradles for holding limbs, plaster bandage splints, fracture appliances for ribs, etc.); others are 
designed to be fixed to a bed, a table or another support (protective bed cradles, extension 
fracture apparatus made of tubing, to be used in the place of splints or cradles, etc.). However, 
when the latter appliances form an inseparable part of the bed, table or another support, they are 
excluded from this heading. 

Subject to the provisions of Note 1 (f) to this Chapter, the heading also includes plates, nails, 
etc., which are inserted inside the human body by surgeons to hold together the two parts of a 
broken bone or for similar treatment of fractures. 

(III) ARTIFICIAL LIMBS, EYES, TEETH 
AND OTHER ARTIFICIAL PARTS OF THE BODY 

These wholly or partially replace defective parts of the body and usually resemble them in 
appearance. They include : 

• (A) Artificial ocular fittings : 

(1) Artificial eyes. These are usually made of plastics or glass to which small quantities of 
metallic oxides have been added in order to imitate the features and colouring of the 
various parts of the human eye (sclera, iris, pupil). They may be of single or of double 
shell types. 

(2) Intra-ocular lenses. 

Artificial eyes for tailors' dummies, for furs, etc., are excluded (generally classified in 
heading 39.26 or 70.18); artificial eyes identifiable as parts of dolls or of toy animals fall in 
heading 95.03 or in heading 70.18, if they are of glass. 

(B) Artificial teeth and dental fittings, for example : 

(1) Solid artificial teeth, usually made of porcelain or plastics (acrylic polymers in 
particular). These may be "diatoric" teeth having a small number of holes into which 
the fixing material penetrates (generally molars), or may be fitted with two metallic 
pins for fixing (generally incisors and canines) or with a groove for sliding on to a 
metal ridge fixed to the dental plate (also usually incisors and. canines). 

(2) Hollow artificial teeth, also made of porcelain or plastics and with the external shape 
of teeth (incisors, canines or molars). 

According to the method of fixing, they are called "pivot teeth" (placed on a small 
metallic pin or pivot fitted into the prepared root), or "crowns" (fitted by means of 
artificial resin on to a previously shaped stump). 

(3)  Dentures, whole or part, comprising a plate of vulcanised rubber, plastics or metal to 
which the false teeth are fitted. 

(4) Other articles such as, prefabricated metal crowns (gold, stainless steel, etc.) used for 
the protection of real teeth; cast tin bars ("heavy bars") for weighting and increasing 
the stability of dentures; stainless steel bars for reinforcing vulcanised rubber dental 
plates; various other dentists' accessories, clearly identifiable as such, for making 
metal crowns or dentures (sockets, rings, pivots, hooks, eyelets, etc.). 

• 
XVIII-9021-3 



 

90.21 • 
It should be noted that ental cements and other dental fillings fall in heading 30.06; the 
preparations known as "d • ntal wax" or as "dental impression compounds", put up in sets, in 
packings for retail sale i r in plates, horseshoe shapes, sticks or similar forms, and other 
preparations for use in den istry, with a basis of plaster (of calcined gypsum or calcium sulphate), 
fall in heading 34.07. 

(C) Other artificial parts o the body, e.g., arms, forearms, hands, legs, feet, noses, artificial 
joints (e.g., for hips, kn es), and tubes of synthetic fabric for replacing blood vessels and 
heart-valves. 

The heading excludes piec s of bone or skin for grafting, in sterile containers (heading 30.01) and 
bone reconstruction cement (heading 30.06). 

(IV) HEARING AIDS 

These are generally electrica appliances with a circuit containing one or more microphones 
(with or without amplifier), receiver and a battery. The receiver may be worn internally or 
behind the ear, or it may be de igned to be held in the hand against the ear. 

This group is restricted to a pliances for overcoming deafness; it therefore excludes articles 
such as headphones, amplifi rs and the like used in conference rooms or by telephonists to 
improve the audibility of spee h. • 

(V) OTHER APP IANCES WHICH ARE WORN OR CARRIED, 
0 IMPLANTED IN THE BODY, 

TO COMPE SATE FOR A DEFECT OR DISABILITY 

This group includes : 

(1) Speech-aids for persons aving lost the use of their vocal cords as a result of an injury or a 
surgical operation. Thes consist essentially of an electronic impulse generator. When 
pressed against the neck, for example, they generate vibrations in the cavities of the throat 
which are modulated by t e user to produce audible speech. 

(2) Pacemakers for stimulati i g defective heart muscles. These are roughly the size and weight 
of a pocket watch and are implanted beneath the skin of the patient's chest. They 
incorporate an electric b ttery and are connected by electrodes to the heart, which they 
provide with the impulse s necessary for its functioning. Other types of pacemakers are used 
to stimulate other organs for example, the lungs, the rectum or the bladder). 

(3)  Electronic aids for the blind. These consist essentially of an ultrasonic transmitter-receiver 
powered by an electric b ttery. The frequency variations resulting from the time taken for 
the ultrasonic beam to t avel out to an obstacle and be reflected back enable the user, 
through an appropriate d vice (e.g., an internal ear-piece), to detect the obstacle and judge 
its distance. 

(4) Appliances implanted in the body, used to support or replace the chemical function of 
certain organs (e.g., secre ion of insulin). 

ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions ofotes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of appar tus or appliances of this heading remain classified here. 

XVIII-9021-4 



• 90.22 

90.22 - Apparatus based on the use of X-rays or of alpha, beta or gamma radiations, 
whether or not for medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses, including 
radiography or radiotherapy apparatus, X-ray tubes and other X-ray generators, 
high tension generators, control panels and desks, screens, examination or treatment 
tables, chairs and the like (+). 

- Apparatus based on the use of X-rays, whether or not for medical, surgical, 
dental or veterinary uses, including radiography or radiotherapy apparatus : 

9022.12 - - Computed tomography apparatus 

9022.13 - - Other, for dental uses 

9022.14 - - Other, for medical, surgical or veterinary uses 

9022.19 - - For other uses 

• - Apparatus based on the use of alpha, beta or gamma radiations, whether or 
not for medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses, including radiography or 
radiotherapy apparatus : 

9022.21 - - For medical, surgical, dental or veterinary uses 

9022.29 - - For other uses 

9022.30 - X-ray tubes 

9022.90 - Other, including parts and accessories 

(I) APPARATUS BASED ON THE USE OF X-RAYS 

The fundamental element of this apparatus is the unit containing the X-ray generating tube or 
tubes. This unit, which is usually suspended or mounted on a pedestal or other support with a 
directing or elevating mechanism, is fed with appropriate voltages from special equipment 
consisting of an assembly of transformers, rectifiers, etc. In most other respects, the structural 
charactenstics of X-ray apparatus vary according to the use for which they are designed, for 
example : 

(A) X-ray apparatus used in diagnosis. These depend on the facts that X-rays can penetrate 
bodies which are impervious to ordinary light and that their absorption increases with the 
density of the bodies traversed. They include : 

(1) Radioscopic (fluoroscopic) apparatus. X-rays which have traversed the organ under 
examination are made to cast a shadow on a screen; the varying densities of the shadow 
image represent the state of the organ. 

(2) Radiographic apparatus. After leaving the body under examination, the X-rays strike 
a photographic plate or film and are recorded thereon. The same apparatus may be used 
for radioscopy and radiography. 

(3) Apparatus consisting of X-ray apparatus combined with a specially designed 
camera. These photograph the image of which is produced on an X-ray screen 
mounted in the camera itself. Provided the apparatus and specialised camera are 
presented at the same time, they are to be classified together in this heading even if 
they are separately packed for convenience of transport. Separately presented cameras, 
however, are classified in heading 90.06. 

• 
XVIII-9022-1 



90.22 • 
(B) Radiotherapy apparat u s. Both the penetrating power of X-rays and their destructive 

effect on certain living ti sues are used in the treatment of many diseases, e.g., certain skin 
diseases and certain tumc urs. This treatment is known as "superficial" or "deep" according 
to the depth reached by t e rays. 

(C) X-ray apparatus for in lustrial use. There are many industrial applications of X-rays. 
They are used, for exam le, in metallurgy to locate blisters or to check the uniformity of 
alloys; in engineering to check the accuracy of assemblies; in the electrical industry to 
check heavy cables or fr sted glass lamps; in the rubber industry to check the reactions of 
the inner casings of tyres e.g., stretching of canvases); in various industries for checking or 
measuring the thickness of materials. For all these various applications the apparatus 
generally resembles that ised for diagnostic purposes described above, except that it may 
be equipped with adaptor and ancillary equipment for particular purposes. 

The heading also covers : 

(1) Special apparatus (X4ray diffraction and X-ray spectrometry equipment) used for the 
examination of the crystalline structure as well as the chemical composition of 
materials; the X-rays re diffracted by crystals and then made to fall on a photographic 
film or an electronic unter. 

(2) Apparatus for radiosc pic examination of bank notes or other documents. 

(II) AP ARATUS BASED ON THE USE OF 
ALPH BETA OR GAMMA RADIATIONS 

Alpha, beta or gamma radiations emanate from a radioactive substance with the property of 
emitting radiations by spontaneous transformation of its atoms. This radioactive substance is 
placed in a container, normally of steel coated with lead (bomb), which has an aperture designed 
to let the radiations pass in one direction only. Gamma radiations can be used for much the same 
purpose as X-rays. 

The following types may be distinguished, according to the radiations employed and the use for 
which they are designed : 

(1) Therapy apparatus, in hich the radioactive source is a charge of radium, radio-cobalt or 
some other radioactive isotope. 

(2)  Apparatus for radiological examinations, used mainly in industry for checking metal 
parts, etc., without damaging their structure. 

(3)  Apparatus having a mei suring instrument such as beta and gamma ray thickness gauges 
for measuring the thick ess of materials (sheets, linings and the like), apparatus for 
monitoring the contents of packages containing any product (pharmaceutical products, 
foodstuffs, sporting gun cartridges, perfumes, etc.) or ionisation anemometers. In these 
apparatus, the required i formation is generally obtained by measuring the change in the 
amount of radiation appli d to the factor under examination. 

(4) Fire alarms incorporating smoke detectors containing a radioactive substance. 

The heading does not cover i struments and apparatus which are not designed to incorporate a 
radioactive source and which erely measure or detect radiation even when such instruments are 
calibrated in arbitrary terms (hea ng 90.30). 

XVIII-9022-2 



• 90.22 

(III) X-RAY TUBES AND OTHER X-RAY GENERATORS, 
HIGH TENSION GENERATORS, CONTROL PANELS AND DESKS, 

SCREENS, EXAMINATION OR TREATMENT TABLES, 
CHAIRS AND THE LIKE 

This group includes : 

(A) X-ray tubes. These are devices in which electrical energy is transformed into X-rays. 

The characteristics of such tubes vary according to the use for which they are designed. 
They consist essentially of a cathode from which the electrons are emitted, and a target 
(anti-cathode or anode) on which the electrons impinge, thus causing it to emit X-rays. In 
some cases, the tubes also have a number of intermediate electrodes for accelerating the 
stream of electrons. The electrodes are mounted in a tube or container, usually of glass, 
with the appropriate electrical contacts. The tube is often mounted in an electrically 
insulated metal container filled with oil. Sometimes the tube is gas filled, but more usually 
it is maintained at a high degree of vacuum. 

• The heading excludes glass envelopes for X-ray tubes (heading 70.11). 

(B) Other X-ray producing apparatus, e.g., apparatus incorporating a betatron which greatly 
accelerates the stream of electrons and so produces X-rays of a very high penetrating 
power. Betatrons and other electron accelerators not adapted for the production of X-rays 
nor incorporated in X-ray apparatus are excluded (heading 85.43). 

(C) X-ray screens. Radioscopic screens are fluorescent surfaces on which the radiations are 
received. The active surface usually consists of barium cyanoplatinate, cadmium sulphide 
or cadmium tungstate. They are often also coated with a lead-glass facing. Some screens, 
known as intensifying screens, produce an image which consists of actinic light that adds to 
the density of the photographic image formed purely by the X-rays. 

(D) X-ray high tension generators. These incorporate a transformer and rectifying valves 
mounted inside an insulating screen; they also have detachable high tension contacts for 
making connections to the X-ray tube. It should be noted that this heading is restricted to 
generators which are specialised for use with X-ray apparatus. 

(E) X-ray control panels and desks. These incorporate devices for controlling the exposure 
time and voltage, and often also include a dosimeter forming an integral part of the 
apparatus. It should be noted that this heading is restricted to panels and desks which are 
specialised for use with X-ray apparatus. 

(F) Examination or treatment tables, chairs and the like specialised for X-ray work, 
whether designed to be incorporated in the X-ray apparatus or to form separate articles. 
Provided they are exclusively or primarily designed for use with X-ray apparatus, such 
tables, chairs, etc., remain classified in this heading even if presented separately; but tables, 
chairs, etc., not specialised for X-ray work are excluded (usually heading 94.02). 

* * 

This heading also includes lightning arresters based on the principle of radioactivity. 

XVIII-9022-3 



90.22 • 
ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of N tes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories identifia le as being solely or principally for use with X-ray apparatus, 
etc., are also classified in this h ading. Such parts and accessories include : 

(1) Applicators, usually lead lined, for fitting to the X-ray tube port or radioactive "bomb"; 
they are sometimes called localisers". 

(2) Electric incandescent ce tring devices, used particularly in radiotherapy to check the area 
treated, by direct sightin on the skin. Like the previous accessories, these devices are 
usually mounted on the ou let port of the X-ray tube or of the "bomb". 

(3) Protective casings of lea s -glass or of other substances based on certain salts opaque to 
X-rays. These casings are placed around the X-ray tubes to protect operators against 
harmful radiations. 

(4) Lead covered or lead- ass protective screens or shields for placing between the 
operator and the X-ray tub s. 

The heading does not, however, over protective devices designed to be worn by the operator, such as 
overalls or gloves of lead-filled ru i ber (heading 40.15), or lead-glass goggles (heading 90.04). • 
The heading also excludes : 

(a) Radium needles, and tube needles and the like containing other radioactive materials 
(Chapter 28). 

(b) Photographic plates and film ( hapter 37). 

(c) Kenotrons and other rectifyi g tubes or valves, used in power supply units for X-ray apparatus 
(heading 85.40). 

(d) Apparatus for examining radi photographs (including image projectors) (heading 90.08 or 90.10), 
and apparatus for developing diographic or radiophotographic photographs (heading 90.10). 

(e) Medical apparatus for applicat on of ultra-violet or infra-red rays (actinotherapy) (heading 90.18). 

(f) Instruments for measuring r detecting alpha, beta, gamma or X-radiations; these fall in 
heading 90.30, unless incorpo ated in radiology apparatus. 

0 
0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 9022.12 

This subheading includes so-calle whole-body computed tomographs. These are radiodiagnosis systems 
for wholebody examination by el ctronic body-section radiography (tomography). The regions of the 
body are scanned by an X-ray be m in individual steps and layers and the varying attenuation of the 
X-rays in the body is measured b hundreds of detectors arranged annularly around the tunnel in which 
the patient lies on a table. 

The system's own automatic data rocessing machine converts the data from the sensors into an image 
which is displayed on the system onitor. The tomographic images are usually photographed by a special 
camera incorporated in the system nd if necessary they are stored electromagnetically. 

• 
XVIII-9022-4 



• 90.23 

90.23 - Instruments, apparatus and models, designed for demonstrational purposes (for 
example, in education or exhibitions), unsuitable for other uses. 

This heading covers a wide range of instruments, apparatus and models designed for 
demonstrational purposes (e.g., in schools, lecture rooms, exhibitions) and unsuitable for other 
uses. 

Subject to this proviso, the heading includes : 

(1) Special demonstrational machines or appliances such as the Wimshurst machine (for 
experiments with electricity), the Atwood machine (for demonstrating the law of gravity), 
Magdeburg hemispheres (for demonstrating the effects of atmospheric pressure), 
the's Gravesande ring (for demonstrating thermal expansion), Newton's disc (for 
demonstrating the colour composition of white light). 

(2) Models of human or animal anatomies (whether or not articulated or fitted with electric 
lighting); models of stereometric bodies, of crystals, etc. Models of this kind are usually 

• made of plastics or of compositions based on plaster. 

(3) Training dummies, constituting an inflatable life-size model of the human body with 
artificial respiratory parts reproducing those of a human being; used for training in the 
"kiss-of-life' revival method. 

(4) Cross-sectional models of ships, locomotives, engines, etc., cut to show their internal 
operation or the functioning of an important part; panels showing, in relief, for example, 
the assembly of a radio (for radiotelegraphists schools), or the oil circulation in an engine, 
etc., whether or not fitted with an electric lighting system. 

(5) Show-cases and exhibit panels, etc., displaying samples of raw materials (textile fibres, 
woods, etc.), or showing the various stages of manufacture or processing of a product (for 
instruction in technical schools). 

(6) Models, etc., for artillery training, used in training courses held indoors. 

(7) Prepared slides for microscopic study. 

(8) Models of towns, public monuments, houses, etc. (of plaster, paperboard, wood, etc.). 

(9) Small scale demonstrational models (of aircraft, ships, machines, etc.) generally of metal or 
wood (e.g., for advertising purposes, etc.). It should, however, be noted that models 
suitable solely for ornamental purposes are classified in their respective headings. 

(10) Relief maps (of provinces, towns, mountain ranges, etc.), relief plans of towns, and 
terrestrial or celestial globes in relief, whether or not printed. 

XVIII-9023-1 



90.23 • 
(11) Military tank simulators hich are used for the training (including advanced training) of 

tank drivers. These consis essentially of the following components : 

a driving cabin mounted on a movable platform, 

a viewing system cel sisting of a scale model of terrain and a television camera 
mounted on a travelli g gantry, 

an instructor's consols 

a computer unit, 

a hydraulic power uni and 

an electrical supply ca inet. 

ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of N.tes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of appara s or appliances of this heading remain classified here. • 

* 
* * 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Printed plans, diagrams, illu trations, etc., even if designed for use in teaching, advertising, etc. 
(Chapter 49). 

(b) Ground flying trainers, of hea mg 88.05. 

(c) Articles designed for both r creational and demonstrational purposes (e.g., certain model sets of 
mechanical parts; mechani 1 or electrical toy locomotives, boilers, cranes, aircraft, etc.) 
(Chapter 95). 

(d) Automata, etc., of heading 96 18. 

(e) Collectors' pieces of heading 7.05. 

(f) Antiques (e.g., relief plans an globes) of an age exceeding 100 years (heading 97.06). 

XVIII-9023-2 



• 90.24 

90.24 - Machines and appliances for testing the hardness, strength, compressibility, 
elasticity or other mechanical properties of materials (for example, metals, wood, 
textiles, paper, plastics). 

9024.10 - Machines and appliances for testing metals 

9024.80 - Other machines and appliances 

9024.90 - Parts and accessories 

This heading covers a wide range of machines and appliances for testing the hardness, elasticity, 
tensile strength, compressibility or mechanical properties of various materials (e.g., metals, 
wood, concrete, textile yarns and fabrics, paper or paperboard, rubber, plastics, leather). It 
therefore excludes : 

(a) Instruments or appliances for examining the microscopic structure of materials (e.g., metallographic 
or other microscopes - heading 90.11 or 90.12), or for analysing materials, or measuring properties 

• such as porosity, thermal expansion, etc. (heading 90.27). 

(b) Instruments or apparatus designed only for ordinary measurement or checking of width, thickness, 
etc. (e.g., of machined parts, wire, metal goods) (heading 90.17 or 90.31). 

(c) Instruments for detecting faults, fissures, cracks or other defects in materials 
(heading 90.31). 

The machines and appliances of this heading are generally used in industrial or research 
laboratories for testing manufactured articles (usually carefully selected or standard specimens). 
They may also be used during manufacturing processes, in constructional work (in workshops, 
building sites, etc.) or to check goods on delivery in warehouses, etc. 

They may range from large mechanically, electrically or hydraulically operated machines of 
considerable weight (several tons) to small portable or even pocket size instruments. Some 
"universal" types (e.g., for metal testing) can be used for hardness, tensile, bending, etc., tests 
by means of separate attachments. Although they usually operate on the "start-stop" principle, 
some are designed for automatic or semi-automatic operation, (e.g., for testing large output off 
an assembly line). 

Test results may be ascertained either by direct reading (sometimes with the aid of a simple 
optical device such as a magnifying glass, or even a built-in microscope or profile projector), or 
by separate microscopic examination of the test-piece (e.g., observation of ball-test marks on 
metal). In addition, certain machines may have provision for recording the stresses, strains, etc., 
borne by the test-piece. 

(I) MACHINES AND APPLIANCES FOR TESTING METALS 

This group covers machines and appliances for : 

(A) Tensile testing on test-pieces, bars, wire, cables, springs, etc. Tensile tests are used to 
ascertain the elasticity, breaking stress and many other important properties of a metal. 
Tensile testing machines are of various types (e.g., vertical or horizontal, endless screw or 
hydraulic load types); basically, however, they each comprise jaws or clamps for holding 
the sample under test. 

XVIII-9024-1 



90.24 • 
(B) Hardness tests on test-pi ces, bars, machined parts, etc., the hardness of a metal being 

measured in terms of resis ance of that metal to indentation. These tests include : 

(1) The steel ball indenta on test (hardened steel or metallic carbide ball) or Brinell test. 
The indentation is pr•duced by applying a continuous pressure (not by impact or by 
repeated blows) to the steel ball, by means of a lever, spring or piston; the diameter of 
the imprint is then me sured with a microscope. 

(2) The diamond pyram d indentation test. This test may be made by the Rockwell 
method (in which the •e pth of the indentation is measured with a dial comparator), or 
by the Vickers metho (microscope measurement of the area of the indentation). Other 
forms of these tests a e also used (Monotron, Shore, Knoop, etc.), and there are also 
instruments for testin , soft metals by means of a steel indenting tool (e.g., Rockwell 
method). The above th ee tests may be carried out by the same machine. 

(3)  The rebound test ca 'ed out by the aid of scleroscopes or sclerographs. A small 
hammer (usually tipp d with a diamond pyramid) is released from a pre-determined 
height on to the surfac of the piece under test. The harder the metal, the higher will be 
the rebound of the ha er. 

(4) The pendulum hardn ss test in which the oscillations of a pendulum resting on the 
specimen are observed The pendulum consists of an inverted U-shaped cast iron body • 
fitted in the middle wit a steel ball. 

(C) Bending tests. 

(1) Impact tests carried •ut on bars (whether or not notched). The bar rests on two 
supports and is subjec ed to the repeated impacts of a ram until it breaks; its limiting 
resistance is thus dete fined 

(2) Pressure tests (mainly for bars), bending tests (springs). 

(D) Ductility tests mainly us 11 to test sheet metal. An indenting tool, usually tipped with a 
steel ball, is gradually pres ed into the sheet up to the point of perforation; the first contact 
is recorded, and the stress nd deflection are then measured. 

(E) Folding tests (sheets, bar and wire), compression tests and shearing tests (mainly for 
cast iron). 

(F) Fatigue tests. Test-pieces e not only submitted to simple stresses, as described above, but 
are also subjected to com I II und and varying stresses. These tests are carried out by means 
of rotating bending mac ines (the specimens rotate at high speed), or reversal torsional 
machines (in which the torsional direction is alternately reversed), electro-magnetic 
fatigue-testing machines, tc. e 

(II) MACHINES A D APPLIANCES FOR TESTING TEXTILES 

The main tests carried out by m chines of this group include : 

(1) Extensibility and resistan e to rupture tests, elasticity or tensile strength under strain 
tests, and the like (and cimbinattons of such tests). The material under test may be raw 
fibres or yarns, ropes or ca les, ordinary fabrics, webbing, belts, etc. 

• 
XVIII-9024-2 



90.24 

These tests are made with the aid of dynamometers of various types, usually named after 
their operating principle (e.g., pendulum or balance-lever, dynamometers) or according to 
the material for which they are most frequently used (e.g., single yarn, twisted yam or rope, 
glass fibre, hank or skein, fabric, dynamometers); these tests may also be made by the use 
of extensometers. Some dynamometers are equipped with a ball device for perforation 
tests on fabrics. 

(2) Tests to detect changes in the dimensions of textile samples. The expansion or shrinkage 
of a sample of fabric is measured after it has been stretched in the dry and in the wet states. 

(3)  Wear and tear tests. These are carried out on textile goods liable to be exposed to friction 
(sheets, cloths, table linen, etc.) and sometimes also on the yarn itself. 

These tests are carried out by means of abrasion-testers, wear-testers, etc. A strip of cloth 
stretched at a suitable tension is progressively worn away by a friction instrument (an 
abrasive disc, a rotating cylinder fitted with metal flanges, a steel milling wheel, etc.). 
Wear and tear resistance is measured by the number of revolutions required for the friction 
instrument to cause the fabric to break. 

The heading does not include instruments used to inspect textile materials (e.g., yarn uniformity testers; 
strain-testers to determine the tension to which yarn is subjected on warping-frames, on spoolers, etc.; 
yarn torsion counters and torsiographs to measure the torsion of yarns (heading 90.31). 

(III) MACHINES AND APPLIANCES FOR TESTING PAPER, 
PAPERBOARD, LINOLEUM, FLEXIBLE PLASTICS 

OR FLEXIBLE RUBBER 

These tests are mainly concerned with tensile strength (measuring of extensibility, break-load, 
etc.) or resistance to perforation. They are effected by means of dynamometers similar in basic 
design to those used for textiles. 

This group includes bursting strength testers, fold testers, etc. (e.g., for paper), elasticity 
meters, reboundimeters, tensile testers, abrasion machines, plastimeters (e.g., for rubber or 
plastics). 

(IV) MACHINES AND APPLIANCES 
FOR TESTING OTHER MATERIALS 

Most of these materials (e.g., wood, concrete, hard plastics) are subjected to tensile, bending, 
hardness, compression, shearing, abrasion, etc., tests, by means of machines and apparatus 
similar in principle to those used for metal testing (by ball-imprint, impact, etc.). 

The heading also includes a large number of instruments, usually small in size, designed to 
determine the tensile strength, resistance to bending, compression, etc., of test-pieces moulded 
from foundry moulding sand. It also covers instruments designed for measuring the surface 
hardness of finished foundry moulds or mould cores. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of apparatus or appliances of this heading remain classified here. 

XVIII-9024-3 



90.25 • 
90.25 - Hydrometers and imilar floating instruments, thermometers, pyrometers, 

barometers, hygrom ters and psychrometers, recording or not, and any 
combination of these i struments. 

- Thermomet rs and pyrometers, not combined with other instruments : 

9025.11 - - Liquid-fill d, for direct reading 

9025.19 - - Other 

9025.80 - Other instru ents 

9025.90 - Parts and ac essories 

(A) HYDROMETE S AND SIMILAR FLOATING INSTRUMENTS 

These instruments are used for etermining, generally by direct reading on a graduated stem, the 
specific gravity of solids or li quids, or some arbitrary value related to specific gravity (e.g., 
strength of spirituous liquors). he reading is sometimes converted by a table into other units. 

The instruments are usually m de of glass (though some may be of metal, e.g., nickel-silver, 
silver, etc), and weighted at one end with mercury or fine lead shot. These weights are • 
generally fixed, but instrumen s for ascertaining the density of liquids of different specific 
gravities are sometimes design d so that the weights can be varied or additional weights added. 
Some hydrometers (e.g., those used to determine the strength of the acid in accumulators) are 
enclosed in a glass syringe. Oth r types are combined with a thermometer. 

Most of these instruments are known according to the use for which they are designed, for 
example, alcoholometers; sa charometers (used in brewing or in sugar manufacture); 
salinometers; lactodensimeters r lactometers; acidimeters (for determining the specific gravity 
of accumulator or other acid) urinometers; etc. Others are named after the inventor (e.g., 
Bawl* Brix, Balling, Bates, ay-Lussac, Richter, Tralle, Sikes, Stoppani, etc.). Nicholson's 
hydrometer is used for solids. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Instruments which determine ecific gravity by other methods, for example, pyknometers (specific 
gravity bottles) (heading 70.1 , specific gravity or hydrostatic balances (heading 90.16). 

(b) Certain analysis apparatus hich are not floating instruments, for example, butyrometers (for 
determining the fatty content f butter), ureometers (for testing urea content); these are classified in 
heading 70.17. 

(B) THERMOMET RS, THERMOGRAPHS AND PYROMETERS 

This group includes : 

(1) Glass thermometers, w th a liquid-filled glass tube. These include household 
thermometers (room, w ndow thermometers, etc.), floating thermometers (bath 
thermometers, etc.), clinic , 1 thermometers, industrial thermometers (for boilers, furnaces, 
autoclaves, etc.), labor tory thermometers (used in calorimetry, etc.), special 
meteorological thermome ers (e.g., for measuring solar or terrestrial radiations), 
thermometers used in by ography (e.g., reversible thermometers used in taking deep-sea 
soundings). The heading a so includes glass thermometers called minimum and maximum 
thermometers since they a e designed to indicate the highest and lowest temperature they 
have recorded. 

XVIII-9025-1 



• 90.25 

(2) Metallic thermometers (in particular bi-metallic thermometers which make use of the 
different coefficients of expansion of two metal strips welded together). They are mainly 
used in meteorology, for air conditioning and for other scientific or industrial purposes; 
thermometers for use with motor vehicles, to indicate the temperature of the radiator water, 
are usually of this type. 

(3) Expansion or pressure thermometers with metallic systems. In these thermometers the 
expansible medium (liquids, vapours, gases) develops a pressure and actuates a Bourdon 
tube or similar pressure measuring device, which then operates a pointer over an indicator 
dial. Most of these thermometers are used for industrial purposes. 

(4) Liquid crystal thermometers. These contain liquid crystals which change their physical 
properties (e.g., colour) according to variations in temperature. 

(5) Electrical thermometers and pyrometers, such as : 

(i) Resistance thermometers and pyrometers operating by changes in the electrical 

• resistance of a metal (e.g., platinum) or of a semiconductor. 

(ii) Thermocouple thermometers and pyrometers based on the principle that the heating 
of the junction of two different electric conductors generates an electro-motive force 
proportional to the temperature. The combinations of metals used are generally : 
platinum with rhodium-platinum; copper with copper-nickel; iron with copper-nickel; 
nickel-chromium with nickel-aluminium. 

(iii) Radiation (including optical) pyrometers. These are of various types, e.g. : 

(a) Pyrometers in which a concave mirror concentrates the radiations from an 
incandescent body, e.g., onto the hot junction of a thermocouple placed at the 
focal point of the mirror. 

(b) Disappearing filament pyrometers. In these the temperature is measured by 
varying the brightness of a filament of an incandescent lamp, by means of a 
rheostat device, until it coincides with that of the image of the source to be 
controlled. 

Electrical thermometers and pyrometers are sometimes combined with automatic regulating devices 
which control the operation of the furnace, oven, fermentation vats, etc. Such combinations are 
classified in heading 90.32. 

(6) Optical, photometric cube type pyrometers. A prism provides a field of view in which 
the centre section is illuminated by a standard incandescent lamp and the surrounding field 
is illuminated by light from the hot body. A circular glass disc, coated with an emulsion of 
varying density, is rotated so as to vary the intensity of light from the hot body. The 
number of degrees of rotation of the disc necessary to match the brightness in the inner and 
outer parts of the field is a measure of the temperature. 

(7) Optical, disappearing filament type pyrometers. The intensity of the image reflected 
from the furnace is equalised with that of the standard lamp by interposing a series of 
smoked glasses, or by the rotation of a graduated wedge of absorbing glass corresponding 
to given temperatures. 

(8) Pyrometric telescopes based on rotatory polarisation. These consist of two Nicol prisms 
between which is placed a calibrated quartz crystal; the temperature may be calculated 
from the angle through which one of the Nicol prisms must be turned to obtain a particular 
colouring. 

(9) Pyrometers based on contraction of a solid substance (clay, for instance). These consist 
of an oscillating lever, one arm of which moves before a dial, the other connecting with the 
rod which serves to estimate the temperature. 

The heading also includes "contact" thermometers which indicate temperature but also 

• incorporate an auxiliary device which can operate an electric signal light, alarm, relay or switch. 

XVIII-9025-2 



  

90.25 

It further includes metallic or apour pressure thermometers, sometimes called "pyrometers", 
which enable maximum tempe atures of up to 500 to 600 °C to be measured. 

Thermographs also fall in t is heading. They consist of a thermometer combined with an 
indicator registering the variati ns in temperature on a drum; they are operated by a mechanical 
or electric clock movement, or synchronous motor. 

The heading excludes "pyroscop s", calliper-type instruments used for measuring the contraction of a 
clay, etc., test-piece taken from ceramic furnace during firing to determine the course of the firing 
(heading 90.17 or 90.31). 

(C) BA OMETERS AND BAROGRAPHS 

These are instruments for dete ining the atmospheric pressure; similar instruments (pressure 
gauges) for measuring the pres re of liquids or gases are excluded (heading 90.26). 

There are two types of baro eter in general use, the mercury barometer and the aneroid 
barometer. 

The ordinary mercury-barom ter consists of a mercury-filled glass tube sealed at the upper 
end. In one type the lower end stands in a cistern of mercury, while in another type the lower 
end of the tube is bent into a si hon, the atmospheric pressure then acting on the short open part 
of the tube. In both cases, the mercury column in the tube is balanced by the weight of the 
atmosphere, and its rise or fall indicated on a scale or on a dial with a pointer) is a measure of 
the atmospheric pressure. Mer ury barometers include the Fortin barometer (with adjustable 
cistern), the siphon baromete (with adjustable scale), the marine barometer (mounted in 
gimbals). 

In the aneroid barometer the tmospheric pressure acts on one or more exhausted, corrugated 
metal capsules, or on a thin-w lled, bent metal tube. The deformation of the capsules or of the 
tube is amplified and transmitte • to a pointer indicating the atmospheric pressure on a scale or is 
converted into an electrical si al. 

This heading also includes : 

(1) Barometric altimeters w ich indicate not only atmospheric pressure but also altitude; it 
should, however, be not d that the heading excludes altimeters (especially for air 
navigation) which indicate altitude only (heading 90.14). 

(2) Sympiesometers. In the the mercury is replaced by a liquid such as oil which 
compresses a gas containe ' in the tube. 

Barographs are instruments fel recording atmospheric pressure in a manner similar to that in 
which the thermographs record emperature (see Part (B) above). 

(D) HYG OMETERS AND HYGROGRAPHS 

These are used to determine the moisture content of the air or other gases. The main types are : 

(1) Chemical hygrometers, ased on absorption of moisture by chemical substances which 
are then weighed. 

(2) Condensation or dewp i int hygrometers, using the "dewpoint" method (i.e., the 
temperature at which wate. vapour begins to condense). 

(3) Hair hygrometers, based ►n the change in length of one or more hairs or strips of plastics, 
according to whether they re dry or humid. The hairs or strips of plastics are strung over a 
frame, weighted with a co terweight, and mounted on a pulley the axle of which is fitted 
with a needle moving acr ss a dial. In some devices the movement is converted into an 
electrical signal. 

XVIII-9025-3 



90.25 

(4) Hygrometers consisting of a torus-shaped glass tube partly filled with mercury, and 
closed at one end by a diaphragm semi-pervious to the water vapour in the atmosphere. The 
pressure of the water vapour acts on the mercury and thus displaces the tube round a shaft 
connected to a needle on the dial. In some devices the displacement of the tube is converted 
into an electrical signal. 

(5) Hygrometers with metallic strips wound helicoidally and coated with a substance which 
reacts to humidity. The hygroscopic reaction varies the length of the metallic strips. This 
movement is transmitted to an axle fixed to the end of the metallic strips and fitted with a 
needle moving across a dial. In some devices the movement is converted into an electrical 
signal. 

(6) Electrical hygrometers. The operation of electrical by ometers is normally based on the 
variation of conductivity of special absorbent salts e.g., lithium chloride) or on the 
variation of the capacity of an electrical element in relation to humidity. (These instruments 
are sometimes graduated to show the dewpoint of the element to be measured.) 

Fancy hygroscopes consisting essentially of more or less decorative objects (chalets, towers, 
etc.) with figurines coming in or going out, according to whether the weather is likely to be 
good or bad, are also classified here. On the other hand, papers impregnated with chemical 
substances, the colour of which varies according to the moisture content of the atmosphere are 
excluded (heading 38.22). 

Hygrographs, which also fall in this heading, are similar to hair hygrometers but record 
variations of relative humidity in a manner similar to that in which thermographs record 
temperature (see Part (B) above). 

This heading does not cover instruments which determine the moisture content of solid matter 
(heading 90.27). 

(E) PSYCHROMETERS 

These are a special type of hygrometer. They determine the humidity content by reference to the 
difference in the temperatures indicated by (a) a dry thermometer which registers air 
temperature, and (b) a wet thermometer whose bulb is kept continually moist by a material 
impregnated with water which absorbs heat on evaporation. 

Electrical psychrometers usually employ resistance thermometers or semiconductors in place of 
the non-electric thermometers of the normal psychrometer. 

* * 

Hygrometers and psychrometers are employed for a wide variety of purposes, e.g., in 
meteorology (in observatories, in the home, etc.), in laboratories, in refrigerating plants, in 
artificial incubation, in air conditioning (especially in textile mills). 

COMBINATIONS OF INSTRUMENTS 

This heading also includes combinations of the instruments referred to above (e.g., 
combinations of hydrometers, thermometers, barometers, hygrometers, psychrometers), except 
when the addition of one or more other devices gives the combination the character of 
equipment or appliances covered by more specific headings (e.g., heading 90.15 as 
meteorological instruments). In particular, the following remain classified in this heading : 

(1) Thermo-hygrographs and baro-thermo-hygrographs; actinometers (instruments 
consisting simply of two special thermometers combined). 

(2) Pagoscopes, i.e., instruments giving warning of frost, and therefore used especially in 
horticulture. These also consist essentially of a combination of two thermometers. 

On the other hand, the heading excludes radio-sondes for atmospheric soundings (see Explanatory Note 
to heading 90.15). 

XVIII-9025-4 



90.25 • 
ARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of N tes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
separately presented parts and accessories of apparatus or appliances of this heading remain 
classified here (e.g., dials, poin ers, cases, graduated scales). 

XVIII-9025-5 



• 90.26 

90.26 - Instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking the flow, level, pressure or 
other variables of liquids or gases (for example, flowmeters, level gauges, 
manometers, heat meters), excluding instruments and apparatus of heading 90.14, 
90.15, 90.28 or 90.32. 

9026.10 - For measuring or checking the flow or level of liquids 

9026.20 - For measuring or checking pressure 

9026.80 - Other instruments or apparatus 

9026.90 - Parts and accessories 

Apart from instruments or apparatus more specifically covered by other headings of the Nomenclature, 
such as : 

(a) Pressure-reducing valves and thermostatically controlled valves (heading 84.81); 

• (b) Anemometers (wind gauges) and hydrological level gauges (heading 90.15); 

(c) Thermometers, pyrometers, barometers, hygrometers and psychrometers (heading 90.25); 

(d) Instruments and apparatus for physical or chemical analysis, etc. (heading 90.27), 

this heading covers instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking the flow, level, 
pressure, kinetic energy or other process variables of liquids or gases. 

The instruments and apparatus of this heading may be fitted with recording, signalling or optical 
scale-reading devices or transmitters with an electrical, pneumatic or hydraulic output. 

Measuring or checking apparatus generally incorporates an element sensitive to variations in 
the quantity to be measured (e.g., Bourdon tube, diaphragm, bellows, semiconductors) moving a 
needle or a pointer. In some devices the variations are converted into electrical signals. 

Measuring or checking instruments or apparatus of this heading combined with taps, valves, 
etc., are to be classified as indicated in the Explanatory Note to heading 84.81. 

(I) APPARATUS FOR MEASURING OR CHECKING 
THE FLOW OR RATE OF FLOW OF LIQUIDS OR GASES 

(A) Flowmeters. These indicate the rate of flow (in volume or weight per unit of time) and are 
used for measurement of flow both through open channels (rivers, waterways, etc.) and 
through closed conduits (piping, etc.). 

Some flowmeters use the principle of the fluid meters of heading 90.28 (turbine-type, 
piston-type, etc.), but the majority are based on the principle of differential pressure. These 
include : 

(1) Differential pressure (fixed aperture) flowmeters. These comprise essentially : 

(i) a primary device (e.g., Pitot or Venturi tube, simple diaphragm, orifice plates, 
shaped nozzle) to set up a differential pressure, and 

(ii) a differential pressure gauge (float, diaphragm, differential pressure, oscillating 
ring balance or flow transmitters, etc., type). 

• 
XVIII-9026-1 



90.26 • 
(2) Variable area (variab e aperture) flowmeters. These usually consist of a graduated 

cone-shaped tube cont ining a heavy float which is carried along by the current until 
the flow of the liquid between the float and the wall reaches equilibrium. For high 
pressure liquids, use i made either of magnetic flowmeters (the position of an iron 
float in a non-magne is tube being shown externally by a magnet), or of valve 
flowmeters (an iris dia hragm fitted inside the tube being connected in parallel with a 
small flowmeter). 

(3) Flowmeters which op ate by using magnetic fields, ultrasound or heat. 

This heading excludes : 

(a) Hydrometric paddle-whe Is for measuring the rate of flow in rivers, canals, etc., which fall in 
heading 90.15 as hydrok gical instruments. 

(b) Apparatus which merely indicate the total amount of liquid delivered over a period, which are 
classified as supply mete s in heading 90.28. 

(B) Anemometers of the spec'al types used for recording the rate of flow of air currents in 
mines, tunnels, chimneys, maces and conduits in general, and consisting essentially of a 
bladed fan and a calibrate dial. In some devices the measured values are converted into 
electrical signals. • 

(II) INSTRUMENTS AN APPARATUS FOR MEASURING OR CHECKING 
THE EVEL OF LIQUIDS OR GASES 

Level indicators for liquids an indicators for the content of gasometers. 

Level indicators for liquids incl de : 

Float-type. These may giv a direct reading on a graduated column mounted on the float, 
or the effect may be tran • mitted to a dial needle by means of a cable and drum or be 
converted into an electrical signal. 

Pneumatic and hydrostat c type. These are used to measure the level in pressure tanks, 
by means of a differential essure gauge. 

Two-colour light type, fo boilers. These are based on the difference in the refractive 
indices of water and stea They consist of a set of lamps, coloured screens, an optical 
system and a level which i dicates in different colours the respective heights of the water 
and the steam. 

(4) Electrical-type, based, f r example, on the variations of resistance, capacitance, 
ultrasound, etc. 

This heading covers not only 1 vel indicators for closed reservoirs or tanks, but also those for 
open basins and canals (hydroel ctric works, irrigation systems, etc.). 

To ascertain the content of a g someter, the level of the "bell" is measured, either directly or 
from a dial needle to which the ell is connected by means of a cable and drum. 

Instruments for measuring or chec ng the level of solid materials are excluded (heading 90.22 or 90.31, 
as the case may be). 

(III) INSTRUME TS AND APPARATUS FOR MEASURING 
OR CHECKING THE PRESSURE OF LIQUIDS OR GASES 

Pressure gauges (e.g., manom ters), apparatus for measuring the pressure of a liquid or gas. 
These differ from barometers i i that the latter measure atmospheric pressure while pressure 
gauges indicate the pressure of a liquid or gas in a closed space. The main types of pressure 
gauges are as follows : 

(1) Liquid-type pressure ga ges (mercury, water or other liquids, or two non-miscible 
liquids). The liquid is contained in a glass or metal tube; these gauges may be of the single 
column type, U-tube type, inclined tube or multitube type, or be in the form of an 
oscillating ring balance. 

XVIII-9026-2 



• 90.26 

(2) Metallic pressure gauges. Like aneroid barometers, these may have a single or multiple 
diaphragm, a capsule, Bourdon tube or spiral metal tube or some other pressure sensitive 
element which directly moves a pointer or varies an electrical signal. 

(3) Piston-type pressure gauges. In these, the pressure is applied either directly or via a 
diaphragm on to a piston which is weighted or held by a spring. 

(4) Electrical pressuregauges based on variations of an electrical phenomenon (e.g., 
resistance, capacitance) or using ultrasound. 

Vacuum gauges for measuring very low pressures, including ionisation gauges using 
thermionic vacuum tubes (triodes). In these, positive ions produced by collision of the 
electrons with the molecules of the residual gas are attracted towards a negative plate. 
Thermionic vacuum tubes (triodes) presented separately are excluded (heading 85.40). 

The heading also covers the maximum and minimum type pressure gauges. Differential 
pressure gauges, used to measure differences in pressure, include the following types : 
two-liquid, float, oscillating ring balance, diaphragm, capsule, ball (without liquid), etc. 

Ill	 (IV) HEAT METERS 

Heat meters measure the quantities of heat consumed in an installation (e.g., a hot water type 
heating system). They consist essentially either of a liquid supply meter, two thermometers 
placed respectively at the intake and outlet of the conduit, and a counting and totalising 
mechanism. This group also covers thermocouple heat meters. 

Small heat meters of the types mounted on radiators in blocks of flats so that central heating 
costs can be fairly divided resemble thermometers and contain a liquid which evaporates under 
the effect of heat. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
separately presented parts and accessories of apparatus or appliances of this heading remain 
classified here. Examples include separate graphical recording devices (including those in which 
the indications supplied by several measuring or checking instruments are recorded), whether or 
not fitted with devices for signalling, pre-selection or control. 

• 

• 
XVIII-9026-3 



90.27 

90.27 - Instruments and ap s aratus for physical or chemical analysis (for example, 
polarimeters, refracto eters, spectrometers, gas or smoke analysis apparatus); 
instruments and appa tus for measuring or checking viscosity, porosity, expansion, 
surface tension or the like; instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking 
quantities of heat, sou d or light (including exposure meters); microtomes. 

9027.10 - Gas or smok analysis apparatus 

9027.20 - Chromatogr phs and electrophoresis instruments 

9027.30 - Spectromete is, spectrophotometers and spectrographs using optical 
radiations (UV, visible, IR) 

9027.50 - Other instru ents and apparatus using optical radiations (UV, visible, IR) 

9027.80 - Other instru ents and apparatus 

9027.90 - Microtomes; parts and accessories 

This heading includes : 

(1) Polarimeters. Instruments or measuring the angle through which the plane of polarisation 
of a ray of light is rotated in passing through an optically active substance. They consist 
essentially of a source of light, an optical device comprising polarising and analysing 
prisms, a tube holder in hich the substance to be analysed is placed, an observation 
eyepiece and a measuring s ale. 

In addition to the essenti 1 optical elements of a conventional polarimeter, electronic 
polarimeters are also fitte with a photoelectric cell. 

(2) Half-shadow polarimeter for analysing plane or elliptically polarised light. 

(3) Saccharimeters. These ar special polarimeters designed for determining the strength of 
sugar solutions. 

(4) Refractometers. These ar instruments for determining the refractive index of liquids or 
solids (one of the most im • ortant constants in determining the purity of substances). They 
consist essentially of a syst m of prisms, observing and reading eyepieces, and a device for 
controlling the temperature (since this reatly affects the refractive index). They are widely 
used, particularly in food 'ndustries (for testing oils, butter and other fatty substances, 
analysing jam, fruit juices, etc.), in the glass industry, in oil refineries and in biology (for 
measuring the protein conte t of blood plasma or discharges, etc.). 

Most refractometers are m unted on a base or stand; others are of the hand type, while yet 
another type is intended for fixing on the side of manufacturing vats. 

(5) Spectrometers. These inst ments are used to measure the wave-lengths of emission and 
absorption spectra. They consist essentially of an adjustable slit collimator (through which 
the beam of light to be ana ysed passes), one or more adjustable prisms, a telescope and a 
prism table. Some spectro eters (particularly those used for infra-red or ultra-violet rays) 
are fitted with prisms or wit diffraction gratings. 

This group includes : spe troscopes for the observation of spectra; spectrographs for 
recording the spectrum on photographic plate or film (spectrograms); monochromators, 
instruments for isolating a articular line in a line spectrum or for isolating certain parts of 
a continuous spectrum. 

XVIII-9027-1 



• 90.27 

But the headingexcludes spectroheliographs and spectrohelioscopes, used for solar observation 
(heading 90.05); spectrum projectors, for examining an enlarged spectrogram projected on to a 
screen (heading 90.08); micrometric microscopes and spectrocomparators incorporating 
microscopes (for comparative examination of spectrograms by optical observation) (heading 90.11) 
and spectrum analysers for measuring or checking electrical quantities (heading 90.30). 

(6) Mass spectrographs and similar apparatus for analysing the isotopic constitution, etc., of 
materials. But the heading excludes calutrons for isotopic separation (heading 84.01). 

(7) Colorimeters. The term "colorimeter" is applied to two distinct classes of instruments. 
One class is used to determine the colour of a substance (liquid or solid) by matching its 
colour against that produced by three primary colours (red, green and blue) mixed in 
variable but measurable proportions. The other class of colorimeters is used in chemical or 
biochemical analysis to determine the concentration of a substance present in a solution by 
a comparison of the colour of the substance (or of the colour of the substance after 
treatment with a reagent) with that of coloured standard plates or of a standard liquid. In 
one type of colorimeter of the latter class, the solution under test and a standard solution 
are contained in two glass tubes which are viewed by means of two prisms through an 
eyepiece. Certain of these instruments are based on the use of a photoelectric cell. In some 
instruments of this type a paper tape is used with a reagent changing its colour after 
reaction with a gas. These instruments use two photoelectric cells measuring the colour 
before and after reaction with the gas. 

This group also covers other optical analysis apparatus such as nephelometers and 
turbidimeters (for determining the cloudiness of solutions), absorptiometers, 
fluorimeters (for determining fluorescence, widely used for analyses of vitamin, alkaloid 
contents, etc.), blancometers and opacimeters (specially used for measuring the degree of 
whiteness, opacity or brilliance of paper pulp, paper, etc.). 

(8) Gas or smoke analysis apparatus. These are used to analyse combustible gases or 
combustion by-products (burnt eases) in coke ovens, gas producers, blast furnaces, etc., in 
particular, for determining their content of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, oxygen, 
hydrogen, nitrogen or hydrocarbons. Electrical gas or smoke analysis apparatus are mainly 
for determining and measuring the content of the following gases : carbon dioxide, carbon 
monoxide and hydrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, sulphur dioxide, ammonia. 

Some of these instruments or apparatus determine volumetrically the gases absorbed by 
appropriate chemical substances, or burnt. These include : 

(i) Orsat's apparatus consisting mainly of an aspirating bottle, one or more absorption 
bulbs and a measuring burette. 

(ii) Combustion or explosion aparatus. This is equipped, in addition, with a 
combustion or explosion pipette (platinum capillary tube, platinum or palladium wire 
tube, with induction sparking, etc.). 

These various types of apparatus may also be used in combination. 

Other models work on the basis of density, or by fractional condensation and distillation 
(cracking), or on the following principles : 

(i) Heat conductivity of a gas. 

(ii) Heating effect of combustible gases on an electrode, (e.g., carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen in flue gases). 

(iii) Selective absorption of ultra-violet, visible, infra-red or microwave radiations by the 
gas. 

XVIII-9027-2 



90.27 • 
(iv) Difference in the ma etic permeability of gases. 

(v) Chemiluminescent re tions of the gas with a suitable auxiliary gas component. 

(vi) Flame ionisation of h drocarbons in a hydrogen flame. 

(vii) Difference in the co uctivity of a suitable liquid reagent before and after reaction 
with the gas. 

(viii) Electrochemical react on in cells with solid (especially zirconium oxide for oxygen 
analysis) or liquid elec olytes. 

It should be noted that th heading includes gas or smoke analysis apparatus for use in 
industrial processes (i.e., di ectly connected to furnaces, gas generators, etc.). But apparatus 
consisting merely of labora ory glassware falls in heading 70.17. 

(9) Electronic smoke detecto , used in furnaces, ovens, etc., for example, in which a beam of 
light (or infra-red) rays is d ected on to a photoelectric cell. According to the density of the 
smoke, the passage of this beam through the smoke causes variations in the current in the 
photoelectric cell circuit, t s operating a graduated indicator or a recording system and, in 
certain cases, a regulating v lye. These apparatus may be fitted with an alarm device. • 
Electronic smoke detectors e uipped solely with an alarm fall in heading 85.31. 

(10) Fire damp detectors an other detectors (e.g., for carbon dioxide). These include 
portable apparatus for gas • etection in mines or tunnels, for detecting leaks in mains, etc. 

(11) Apparatus for dust anal sis in gases. These operate by passing a given quantity of gas 
through a filter disc, and w ighing the filter before and after the test. This category includes 
Tyndallometers used for easuring the amount of dust in the air and for testing dust 
masks, filters, etc. They co sist of a dust chamber covered with black glass, a light source, 
a photometric head with a prismatic measuring device and a graduated circular scale for 
measuring the angles of rot tion. 

(12) Oxygen meters for the etermination of dissolved oxygen in liquids by use of a 
polarometric cell or by u ing the chemical reaction of thallium with dissolved oxygen 
(measurement of the chang in electrolytic conductivity). 

(13) Polarographic analysers •r the determination of the components of liquids, e.g., traces of 
dissolved metals in water, y measuring and evaluating the current/resistance relationship 
of electrodes immersed in t e solution. 

(14) Wet-chemical analysers or the determination of inorganic or organic components of 
liquids, e.g., traces of meta s, phosphates, nitrates, chlorides or integral parameters such as 
"Chemical Oxygen Dema " (COD) and "Total Organic Carbons' (TOC). The analyser 
consists of a sample pre $ aration device, an analysing unit with, e.g., ion-sensitive 
electrodes, photometers or olarographs and, in automatic analysers, a control unit. 

(15) Viscometers and the like, sed to determine viscosity (i.e., the internal friction of a liquid). 

They may be based on : 

(i) The principle of the c. pillary tube, that is the measurement of the time required by the 
liquid to flow throug the tube under constant pressure (e.g., Ostwald, Engler, etc., 
viscometers). 

XVIII-9027-3 



• 90.27 

(ii) The effect of friction between a solid and a liquid. 

or (iii) The time taken by a ball to fall through the liquid. 

(16) Polariscopes (strain viewers). These measure internal strains in glass (e.g., strains 
resulting from toughening, annealing, soldering, etc., which might cause the glass to break 
easily). They consist essentially of a chamber containing an electric lamp, a light diffusion 
device, a polariser and a polarising telescope. Stresses in the glass are shown as bright 
iridescences. 

(17) Expansion meters. These measure the expansion or contraction on change of temperature 
of steel, metal alloys, coke, etc. Most of these instruments are of the recording type 
(mechanical recording on a graph or photographic recording). 

(18) Apparatus for the determination of porosity or permeability (to water, air or other 
gases, etc.) known as porosimeters or permeameters (not to be confused with 
permeameters for measuring magnetic permeability of substances). They are used for 

• paper, textile fibres, fabrics, plastics, leather, sand, etc. 

(19) Instruments for measuring the surface or interfacial tension of liquids (e.g., torsion 
balances). The surface or interfacial tension of liquids is usually determined by one of the 
three following factors : the weight of a drop falling from a given capillary tube (or the 
number of drops having a known volume) (drop-weight method); the height of free rise of 
a liquid in a capillary tube of known diameter (capillary rise method); or the force required 
to detach a ring from the surface of a liquid. 

(20) Apparatus for measuring osmotic pressure (osmometers), i.e., the pressure which 
occurs when two miscible liquids are separated by a membrane which is partially but 
unequally permeable to the two liquids. 

(21) Apparatus for testing mineral oils and their derivatives (e.g., tar, bitumen, asphalt). 
These include apparatus for determining the flash point, setting point, flow point, drop 
point, etc., of mineral oils, melting point of paraffin wax, water content, dirt content, 
sulphur content, consistency of greases and tars, cloud point, cold point, etc. 

(22) pH meters and rH (redoxpotential) meters. pH meters are used to measure the factor 
expressing the acidity or alkalinity of a solution or mixture (pure water being the neutral 
standard). rH meters are used to measure the oxidising or reducing power of a solution. 
These instruments operate on a number of different principles; the most common type 

• employs the electrometric system, in which electrodes are used to set up a potential 
difference which is proportional to the pH or rH of the solution. In addition to measuring, 
these instruments may also be used for automatic control. 

(23) Electrophoresis instruments. These are based on the change in concentration occurring 
when a direct current is passed through a solution. The electrically charged particles 
migrate at different speeds according to the nature of the product. 

These instruments usually incorporate a photometric device consisting of a photoelectric cell 
and a milliammeter graduated directly in units of optical density. They are used for analysing 
various solutions (proteins, amino-acids, etc.), for examining substances such as plasma, 
hormones, enzymes, viruses, etc., and for studying polymerisation phenomena. 

• 
XVIII-9027-4 



90.27 

(24) Chromatographs (such as gas-, liquid-, ion- or thin-layer chromatographs) for the 
determination of gas or 1 quid components. The gas or liquid to be analysed is passed 
through columns or thin ayers of absorbent material and then measured by means of a 
detector. The characteristi s of the gases or liquids under analysis are indicated by the time 
taken for them to pass thr ugh the columns or thin layers of absorbent material, while the 
quantity of the different omponents to be analysed is indicated by the strength of the 
output signal from the detector. 

(25) Electronic titration instr ments using measuring electrodes to titrate water, silver salts, 
halogens, etc. 

(26) Analytical instruments —sometimes called "moisture meters for solids" - based on the 
dielectric constant, electrical conductivity, absorption of electromagnetic energy or 
infrared radiation of substances. 

(27) Conductivity meters to etermine the electrolytic conductivity or the concentration of 
salts, acids or bases dissol ed in a liquid. 

(28) Photoelectric cell densito eters and microdensitometers used to measure the density of 
spectrographic photograp s, and for analysing any phenomenon which is recorded on a 
photographic emulsion. • 

(29) Photometers. Instruments for measuring the intensity of light. The light to be measured 
and the standard source o light are placed so that they illuminate a given surface with 
equal intensity. If instead f comparing two light intensities, comparison is made of their 
respective spectra, the ins ment then used is known as a spectrophotometer. 

Photometers are widely u ed for various optical processes and analyses (for determining, 
for example, degree of oncentration, degree of brilliance or transparency of solid 
substances; degree of exp sure of photographic plates or films (densitometers); depth of 
colour of transparent or op que solid substances or solutions). 

Certain photometers used in photography or cinematography are known as exposure 
meters, and are used for m asuring exposure times or for determining lens apertures. 

(30) Luxmeters (used for dete ining the intensity, in "lux" units, of a source of light). 

(31) Calorimeters. These meal re the amounts of heat absorbed or given off by a solid, a liquid 
or a gas. The main categori s are : 

(A) Ice calorimeters (Bu sen's) based on variations in volume produced by melting ice. 
They consist of a test be surrounded by ice, dipped into a tank of water, and of a 
graduated tube contain g mercury. 

(B) Heating calorimeters Berthelot) based on the principle of the transfer of quantities of 
heat. They consist bas ically of a calorimetric jar filled with water inside a vat also 
containing water; they are equipped with stirrers and thermometers. Two current types 
of calorimeter are base on this same principle, i.e. : 

(i) Calorimeters fo r the determination of the specific heat of gases or of liquid 
fuels. In these a pliances, water is circulated through a compartment where a 
quantity of gas or liquid is burnt. The difference in the temperature of the water at 
the time of entry nd leaving is measured. 

Bomb calorimeters. These are used for determining the heats of combustion of 
materials. Basical y they consist of a steel vessel (bomb), containing a known 
amount of the soli a or fluid to be tested and also oxygen under pressure. By means 
of a suitable devi e the specimen is ignited in the oxygen and the amount of heat 
generated is dete fined by placing the bomb in a water calorimeter. 

XVIII-9027-5 



• 90.27 

This heading also includes calorimeters for industrial use; these are mounted on 
generators producing gas with a given calorific power. However, if they are connected to 
regulating apparatus in order to maintain the mixed gases at the required level of calorific 
power, they are excluded (generally heading 90.32). 

(32) Cryoscopes and ebullioscopes other than those having the character of laboratory 
glassware (heading 70.17). 

* * 

This heading also includes microtomes, instruments used in microscope work to cut very thin 
sections of a known thickness from substances to be examined. Microtomes may be of various 
types, e.g., hand type (a kind of straight razor), revolving type, sliding carriage type (horizontal 
or inclined plane). 

• PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
the heading also covers parts and accessories identifiable as being solely or principally for use 
with the above-mentioned instruments and apparatus. 

* 
* * 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Laboratory equipment of refractory materials (retorts, jars, crucibles, cups, baths and the like) 
(heading 69.03), and similar articles of other ceramic materials (heading 69.09). 

(b) Laboratory glassware (heading 70.17). (For further details, see below.) 

(c) Microscopes (heading 90.11 or 90.12). 

(d) Precision balances (heading 90.16). 

(e) X-ray, etc., apparatus (heading 90.22). 

(f) Demonstrational apparatus of heading 90.23. 

• (g) Machines and appliances for carrying out tests on certain materials (heading 90.24). 

(h) Hydrometers, thermometers, hygrometers and similar instruments of heading 90.25, whether or not 
for use in laboratories. 

(ij) The apparatus of heading 90.26. 

• 
XVIII-9027-6 



90.27 • 
Classification of goods which are potentially within the scope both of this heading and of 
heading 70.17 (laboratory gla sware). 

In these cases, classification is overned by the following considerations : 

(1) If an article has the ess ntial character of glassware (whether or not graduated or 
calibrated, and whether or iot with subsidiary stoppers, connections, etc., of rubber, etc.), it 
is not to be classified i i this heading even if it is normally known as a particular 
instrument or apparatus. 

(2) In general, instruments no ally cease to have the essential character of glassware when 
they consist partly of glas but are mainly of other materials, or if they consist of glass 
parts incorporated or per nanently fixed in frames, mounts, cases or the like. 

(3) The combination of glas parts with measuring instruments (e.g., pressure gauges, 
thermometers) may, in p actice, provide grounds for considering such instruments as 
proper to this heading. 

Accordingly, the following instru ents in the form of simple calibrated glassware fall in heading 70.17 : 

Butyrometers, lactobutyrometers a d similar instruments for testing dairy products; albuminometers and 
ureometers; eudiometers; volume ometers; nitrometers, Kipps or Kieldahl apparatus and the like; • 
calcimeters; cryoscopes and ebulli scopes for determining molecular weights, etc. 

* 
* * 

This heading also excludes mach nes or apparatus (whether or not electric) of the type classified in 
Section XVI, whether or not, in iew of their low output, small size and general structure, they are 
obviously intended for use in la oratories (e.g., for preparing or treating specimens). The heading 
therefore excludes ovens, autocla es, drying or steaming ovens or cabinets; desiccators; crushers and 
mixers; centrifuges; stills, presses; lters and filter presses; stirrers; etc. 

Similarly, heating apparatus (Buns n burners, steam-heating baths, etc.), tools, laboratory furniture (e.g., 
laboratory benches, microscope enches, fume cu boards) and brushes are classified in their own 
appropriate headings (Section XV, hapter 94 or 96). 

XVIII-9027-7 



• 90.28 

90.28 - Gas, liquid or electricity supply or production meters, including calibrating meters 
therefor. 

9028.10 - Gas meters 

9028.20 - Liquid meters 

9028.30 - Electricity meters 

9028.90 - Parts and accessories 

These meters are generally fitted with a device driven at a speed proportional to the rate of fluid 
flow or to the electrical quantity being measured. They are often fitted in a bypass or shunt off 
the main or connected to measuring transformers, so that only part of the flow passes through 
them, but are calibrated so as to indicate the total quantity passing through the service pipes or 
through the main. 

• Gas, liquid or electricity supply or production meters fall in this heading whether or not fitted 
with a clockwork recording device, or with a simple mechanical or electrical device for bringing 
controlling, signalling, etc., appliances into action. 

(I) GAS OR LIQUID SUPPLY OR PRODUCTION METERS 

These meters are used to measure in volumetric units the amount of fluid passing through a 
pipe. Flowmeters, which measure rate of flow are excluded (heading 90.26). 

This heading includes household supply meters, plant production or supply meters, and standard 
meters (for checking the accuracy of ordinary meters). In addition to simple meters, the heading 
also includes special meters such as maximum, prepayment, price-calculating, etc., meters. 

Supply or production meters consist essentially of the measuring device (turbine, piston, 
diaphragm, etc.), the mechanism for regulating the admission of fluid (generally slide valves), 
the transmission (endless screw, camshaft, gears or other systems), and a recorder or an 
indicator (pointer or drum type) or both. 

(A) Gas supply or production meters. 

(1) Wet meters. 

The measuring device generally consists of a drum or wheel partitioned into 
compartments; this revolves in a cylindrical casing rather more than half filled with a 
liquid (water, oil, etc.). The drum is rotated by the gas which on entering the meter, fills 
the submerged compartments and thus raises them above the level of the water. The 
revolutions of the drum are indicated on a counting mechanism. 

Another type of meter (nutating bell meter), consists of a bell in which the gas passes in 
and out of a succession of chambers; the bell, which is centrally guided, is thus made to 
nutate around an inclined axis which engages a cranked arm attached to the driving 
spindle of the counting mechanism. 

(2) Dry meters. 

These are of several types. The measuring device may consist of pistons, diaphragms or 
of a fan wheel, driven by the pressure of the gas, and connected to a counter 
mechanism. The usual meter consists of a box divided in two compartments by a 
partition. Each compartment is itself divided by a central diaphragm; the ,gas passes 
successively in and out of these four compartments. The alternating motion of the 
diaphragm operates the counting mechanism. 

• 
XVIII-9028-1 



  

90.28 

(B) Liquid supply or produc ion meters (cold or hot water, mineral oil, alcohol, beer, wine, 
milk, etc.), but not includ ng pumps for liquids (even if fitted with measuring devices) of 
heading 84.13. 

These meters include : 

(1) Impeller or fan wheel meters. 

These are also called inferential meters since the volume of liquid is inferred from its 
speed. The measuring device consists of a fan wheel or impeller which revolves at a 
speed proportional to the flow of the liquid. These revolutions operate a counting 
mechanism. 

(2) Diaphragm meters. 

These are similar to th e dry gas meters described above. A cast iron cylinder is divided 
into two compartment by a flexible diaphragm which extends or retracts when the 
compartments are alt rnately filled or emptied. This motion operates the counter 
mechanism. 

(3) Reciprocating piston meters. 

These meters may co nsist of one or more pistons which perform a reciprocating 
movement inside the cylinders. As in a steam engine, a system of slide valves 
alternately directs the iquid under measure to the top and bottom sides of the piston 
and opens or closes th plug cocks. The motion of the pistons is geared to the counter 
mechanism. 

(4) Disc-piston meters. 

In these meters the pi ton is replaced by a revolving disc which divides a spherical 
chamber into two equ 1 compartments alternately filled and emptied. The resulting 
oscillating motion of th disc is geared to the counter mechanism. 

(5) Rotary piston meters. 

One type of these mete s consists of a cylindrical working chamber fitted with a radial 
partition which projec s partially across the chamber. The measuring device is a 
cylindrical piston, the wall of which is split, and which fits over the partition. The 
filling and emptying o the compartment imparts an oscillating (semi-rotary) motion to 
the cylinder and this m tion is geared to the counter mechanism. 

In another type of met e r there is no partition in the working chamber, and a true rotary 
motion of an elliptica piston is obtained. In some cases, the meter consists of a 
nutating cone in a partit ioned spherical chamber. 

The meters referred to in it ms (2) to (5) above are known as positive displacement type. 

(II) ELECTRIC Y SUPPLY OR PRODUCTION METERS 

These meters measure the a n ount of electricity consumed (in ampere-hours or multiples 
thereof) (quantity meters), or the amount of energy consumed (in watt-hours or multiples 
thereof) (energy meters). Whe i the voltage is constant, quantity meters may be calibrated in 
watt-hours (or in multiples of att-hours). Some meters are devised for use with direct current, 
others for alternating current. 

The heading excludes apparatus s ch as voltmeters, ammeters, wattmeters, etc., which simply measure 
electrical quantities and are not esigned for registering the total amount of electricity or energy 
consumed (heading 90.30). 

XVIII-9028-2 



• 90.28 

This heading includes the following main types of electricity supply meters : 

(A) Motor meters. 

These meters consist essentially of one or more inductors, a revolving element (armature) 
whose speed of revolution is proportional to the amount of electricity or energy consumed, 
a counting mechanism and a pointer or drum indicator (or a combination of both). 

Motor meters are usually fitted with an eddy current brake, a metal brake-disc in which 
eddy currents are generated as it revolves between the poles of one or more permanent 
magnets. 

(B) Static meters. 

These meters consist essentially of electronic static sub-assemblies, such as multipliers or 
quantifiers equipped with an indicating device. They produce an electrical current or 
resistance directly proportional to the amount of electrical energy consumed. The 
indicating device may be mechanical (fitted with a pointer or drum indicator) or 
electronic. 

These include : 

(1) Prepayment meters. 

(2) Multiple-rate meters (calculating the electrical energy supplied at two or more 
different rates). 

(3) Maximum meters (indicating the maximum value of the average load during a given 
period). 

(4) Peak meters (indicating the consumption above a certain peak value). 

(5) Excess meters (similar to peak meters but also indicating the total energy used). 

(6) Impulsing meters (fitted with a pulse transmitter). 

(7) Reactive meters. 

(8) Demonstration meters. 

(9) Direct current meters (volt-hour (Vh) meters, ampere-hour (Ah) meters, watt-hour 
(Wh) meters). 

(10) Meters with pulse input for connection to impulsing meters, fitted with a 
consumption register and a totalling device or a maximum device (indicating or 
recording) or an excess device, etc. 

(11) Standard meters for checking and calibrating other meters. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
separately presented parts and accessories of meters of this heading remain classified here. 

XVIII-9028-3 



 

90.29 • 
90.29 - Revolution counters, roduction counters, taximeters, mileometers, pedometers and 

the like; speed indic • tors and tachometers, other than those of heading 90.14 or 
90.15; stroboscopes. 

9029.10 - Revolution counters, production counters, taximeters, mileometers, 
pedometers nd the like 

9029.20 - Speed indic tors and tachometers; stroboscopes 

9029.90 - Parts and ac essories 

This heading includes : 

(A) Counters indicating a total number of units of any kind (revolutions, items, length, etc.), or 
an amount to be paid. B t the heading excludes totalling devices of a kind falling in 
heading 84.73, the gas, li uid or electricity supply or production meters of heading 90.28, 
and opisometers or planim ters of heading 90.17 or 90.31. 

(B) Apparatus indicating a sped of revolution or a linear speed in relation to a time factor 
(tachometers and speed icators), other than those of heading 90.14 or 90.15. 

(C) Stroboscopes of all kinds. • 
Such apparatus and instrume is remain classified here whether or not they incorporate a 
clockwork recording device, nd whether or not they are fitted with simple mechanical or 
electric devices for bringing a s gnalling apparatus, machine controls, brakes, etc., into action. 

(A) COUNTING DEVICES 

(1) Revolution counters. 

These instruments count e number of revolutions of a mechanical part (e.g., machine 
shaft). They consist mainl of a driving spindle geared to pointer or drum indicators. They 
usually have a device for r -setting the counter to zero. The counters may be coupled to the 
revolving part either direct y (in some cases the part drives the gearing itself) or by remote 
control. The driving spin dle may be operated by a rotary, alternating or pulsating 
movement of the turning p rt (e.g., encoders). 

It should, however, be notedhat the heading excludes yarn grading winding reels, torsiometers and 
similar testing or checking apparatus incorporating revolution counters (heading 90.31). 

(2) Production counters. 

These are similar in const ction to revolution counters. They are used, in particular, for 
measuring lengths (e.g., o r spinning or twisting machines); for counting the movements of 
a machine (an automatic alance, a pump, the picks of a spinning machine, etc.); or for 
counting a number of artic es (printed sheets delivered by a rotary press, articles carried by 
a conveyor belt, bank not s, etc.). In practice, the appliances used for these purposes are 
generally revolution count rs which have been adapted to indicate the length or number of 
units in terms of the revolu ions of the driving spindle. 

Electronic production co nters. The articles to be counted interrupt a beam falling on a 
photoelectric cell. A recor ng apparatus then computes the number of articles which have 
passed through the beam. 

XVIII-9029-1 



• 90.29 

This group also covers multiple counters (e.g., those used to check the output of several 
operators working on the same machine). 

This group also includes the electro-magnetic counters used in automatic telephone 
exchanges to count the number of telephone calls made by a subscriber; they usually 
incorporate an electro-magnet which moves the recording mechanism (cyclometer-type 
rollers, etc.) one position each time a pulse of electric current is passed through its winding. 

(3) Counters for indicating the working hours of machines, motors, etc., (time or hour 
meters). 

In practice, these are revolution counters calibrated in working hours. 

(4) Entry counters. 

These counters are operated by turnstiles or other appliances placed at the entrances of 
museums, parks, sports grounds, etc., where they record the number of visitors or 

•	 spectators. 

(5) Billiards meters. 

These are mechanical counters (roller-type and the like), usually hand-operated, for 
recording the score. 

The heading excludes meters which employ a clock movement to indicate the time in play or the 
amount payable based on that time (heading 91.06). Billiard markers, ball or slide type, fall in 
heading 95.04. 

(6) Instruments and apparatus for measuring short time intervals by counting, and which, 
not having a movement of the watch or clock type (includitv synchronous movements), do 
not fall in Chapter 91. The heading also covers electronic impulse counters (scalers) 
(e.g., passenger counters on motor coaches, trains, etc.). 

(7) Taximeters. 

These usually have a clock movement. They indicate the fare payable in relation to time 
and to the distance covered. 

(8) Mileometers. 

These are revolution counters for vehicles, and are usually graduated in linear units (miles, 
kilometres, etc.). Most mileometers are combined with speed indicators. 

0	 (9) Pedometers. 

These instruments have a watch type mechanism and are used for an approximate 
measurement of distances. They contain a pendulum which, at each step, advances the train 
of wheels by one unit. The distance covered is calculated from the number of steps taken 
and their length. 

(10) Hand-held counters. 

These counters usually read no more than four numbers in fixed categories. The user 
depresses a button in the category being counted to activate the display. 

• 
XVIII-9029-2 



90.29 • 
(B) SPEED INDICATORS AND TACHOMETERS 

These instruments differ from t e revolution counters and production counters of Part (A) above 
in that they indicate the num er of revolutions, speed, output, etc., per unit of time (e.g., 
revolutions per minute, miles per hour, kilometres per hour, metres per minute). They are 
usually mounted on vehicles (cars, motorcycles, bicycles, locomotives, etc.) or machines 
(motors, turbines, paper-making machines, printing machinery, textile machinery, etc.). 

The speed indicators and tacho neters classified here normally function on one of the following 
principles : 

(1) Chronometric system. 

The measuring mechanis e is combined with a clock or watch movement. Sometimes the 
time is measured by mean of a separate chronograph; in this case, the two instruments are 
classified in their appropri to headings. 

(2) Centrifugal system. 

A vertical governor arm, held by a spring, rotates with the driving spindle. A pair of 
weights carried by the go rnor arm are thrown outwards by centrifugal force, so that the 
distance the governor arm is displaced is proportional to the speed. This displacement is • 
transmitted to the instrume t pointer. 

(3)  Vibration system. 

This type is used for hig speed machines such as steam turbines, pumps, compressors, 
electric motors, etc. The m chanical resonance of vibrations of the frame or bearings of the 
machine cause graduated reeds to oscillate at a rate corresponding to the number of 
revolutions of the machine. 

(4) Magnetic (induction) syst m. 

A system of permanent m gnets rotating with the driving spindle generates eddy-currents 
in a disc of copper or al mium placed in the magnetic field. This current is proportional 
to the rotating speed of th- magnets. The disc is thus "dragged" or pulled round, but its 
rotation is retarded by a re training spring. The disc is connected to a pointer indicating the 
speed. 

(5) Electrical systems. 

These are either fitted w th a photoelectric cell or operated by an impulse generator 
mounted on the machine. 

Speed indicators and tachom ters of this heading may be fixed or portable, simple or 
multi-function (e.g., maximum r minimum), differential (in which case they give the difference 
between two speeds as a perc ntage), combined with an adding counter or a time meter or 
graphical recording device, tc. The heading also covers certain instruments which 
simultaneously record speed, m eage, time in motion and at a standstill, etc. 

XVIII-9029-3 



• 90.29 

(C) STROBOSCOPES 

Stroboscopes enable machines in operation to be observed as though they were moving slowly 
or were stationary; they can also be used to measure the speed of rotating or reciprocating 
movements. In the latter case, they are known more particularly as stroboscopic tachometers. 
Stroboscopes operate on the principle of producing apparent immobility or reduced speed in the 
mechanism to be observed, by means of successive glimpses (flashes) at fixed intervals. The 
mechanism under observation may be permanently illuminated for examination through an 
optical instrument (a disc with one or more radial slots or "windows") which interrupts the line 
of sight; or the mechanism may be placed in the dark and illuminated periodically for very short 
periods (flashes). The speed of the rotating or reciprocating mechanism under observation can 
be ascertained by adapting the speed of the disc or the frequency of the flashes until the 
impression of immobility is obtained. 

Stroboscopes based on the principle of permanent illumination consist essentially of a 
clockwork driven with one or more windows, a speed regulator, an eyepiece and a graduated 
drum (usually graduated in revolutions per minute). 

• Stroboscopes functioning on the principle of periodic illumination differ appreciably according 
to the device producing the light flashes. The most simple types consist of an ordinary lamp, a 
motor with a speed regulator controlling the frequency of the flashes, and a graduated dial. The 
flashes may also be produced by a gas discharge lamp. These gas discharge stroboscopes are 
much more complex in structure and can be used for taking photographs or making films; they 
are sometimes mounted on castors or rollers. The flashes required for the observation of a 
rotating or reciprocating mechanism may be controlled by the mechanism itself. 
Synchronisation is achieved by means of a spring-type interrupter, a photoelectric cell, an 
electro-magnetic relay, etc. 

Except when permanently incorporated in stroboscopes, the photographic or cinematographic cameras 
fall in their appropriate heading. 

Stroboscopes are used, in particular, for observing or measuring the speed of motors, 
transmission gear, textile machinery (parts such as spindles, winders, cards, shuttles), 
paper-making machines, printing machinery or machine-tools. They are also used in medicine 
for examination of the vibration of the vocal chords. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 

• separately presented parts and accessories of apparatus or appliances of this heading remain 
classified here. 

• 
XVIII-9029-4 



90.30 • 
90.30 - Oscilloscopes, spectr m analysers and other instruments and apparatus for 

measuring or checki g electrical quantities, excluding meters of heading 90.28; 
instruments and app • atus for measuring or detecting alpha, beta, gamma, X-ray, 
cosmic or other ionisi g radiations. 

9030.10 - Instruments and apparatus for measuring or detecting ionising radiations 

9030.20 - Oscilloscop s and oscillographs 

- Other instru ents and apparatus, for measuring or checking voltage, current, 
resistance o power : 

9030.31 - - Multimete s without a recording device 

9030.32 - - Multimete with a recording device 

9030.33 - - Other, wit out a recording device 

9030.39 - - Other, wit a recording device 

9030.40 - Other instru ents and apparatus, specially designed for telecommunications 
(for exampl , cross-talk meters, gain measuring instruments, distortion factor 
meters, pso hometers) 

- Other instru ents and apparatus : 

9030.82 - - For measu ng or checking semiconductor wafers or devices 

9030.84 - - Other, wit a recording device 

9030.89 - - Other 

9030.90 - Parts and ac essories 

(A) INSTRUME TS AND APPARATUS FOR MEASURING 
OR DETEC ING ALPHA, BETA, GAMMA, X-RAY, 

COSMIC R OTHER IONISING RADIATIONS 

These instruments and appar tus are used in scientific research, for industrial purposes 
(metallurgy, petroleum prospect ing, etc.), or for biological or medical purposes (in conjunction 
with radioactive tracers). They i elude : 

(1) Detection instruments in orporating ionisation chambers. A potential difference is set 
up between two electrode contained in the ionisation chamber. The ions formed when a 
radiation enters the chamb r are attracted to the electrodes, and the resulting changes in the 
potential difference may b amplified and measured. 

(2) Geiger counters. A large otential difference is maintained between the electrodes of the 
counter; the ions produce by an incoming radiation are greatly accelerated, and in turn 
ionise the gas contained in e tube. This sets up impulses which may be counted. 

XVIII-9030-1 



• 90.30 

The ionisation chamber and Geiger counter apparatus of this heading normally consist of 
several units such as a chamber or counter, an amplifier, a voltage supply unit for the chamber 
or counter, and a counting circuit or indicating instrument. All these units are often incorporated 
in the same case. Sometimes all the units except the chamber or counter are in the same case, 
and apparatus of this type (which requires a chamber or counter before it is complete) remains 
classified in this heading (as an essentially complete instrument). When the individual units are 
presented separately they are classified in accordance with the provisions of the General 
Explanatory Note to this Chapter. 

Certain ionisation chambers which are used to measure total quantities of radiation over an 
appreciable time (e.g., 24 hours) do not require any auxiliary amplifiers, etc., but incorporate a 
very light moving pointer which can be read under a microscope and then shows the total 
amount of radiation which has passed through the chamber. These chambers (which often 
resemble fountain pens) are complete measuring instruments in themselves and are classified in 
this heading. 

The heading also covers scintillation counters. These consist of a device (photomultiplier) 
which is made up essentially of a photoelectric cell and an electron multiplier. They operate on 

• the principle that radiation may be detected or measured by its effect in exciting the 
fluorescence of certain crystals zinc sulphide, thallium activated sodium iodide, anthracene, 
plastics impregnated with tetrap enyl-butadiene, etc.). The crystals are placed between the 
source of radiation and one electrode of the counter. 

This group also includes : 

(1) Dosimeters and similar apparatus used in radiology for measuring and checking the 
intensity and penetrating power of X-rays. 

(2) Apparatus for measuring cosmic or similar radiations. 

(3) "Thermopile" neutron detectors and measuring or detecting instruments incorporating 
neutron detector tubes (boron, boron trifluoride or hydrogen types, or using radioactive 
fissionable elements). 

(4) Radiation measuring or detecting instruments incorporating liquid or solid scintillators. 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Apparatus incorporating a scintillation counter whose data are converted into analogue signals for the 
purpose of making medical diagnoses (e.g., gamma camera, scintillation scanner) (heading 90.18). 

• (b) Measuring or checking apparatus designed to incorporate a radioactive source (in particular, artificial 
isotopes), for example, for measuring thickness of materials (sheets, linings or the like), for 
monitorm* the contents of packages, for measuring low speed air currents (ionisation anemometers), 
etc. (heading 90.22). 

• 
XVIII-9030-2 



90.30 • 
(B) OSCILLOSCOPES, SPECTRUM ANALYSERS 
AND OTHER INSTRUMENTS AND APPARATUS 

FOR MEASURING OR CHECKING ELECTRICAL QUANTITIES 

Oscilloscopes and oscillogr phs are used respectively for observing or recording rapid 
variations of an electrical qua ity (voltage, current, etc.). The instruments may be divided into 
three main categories : 

(a) Duddell oscillographs, which a coil, usually consisting of a loop of taut wire with 
mirrors attached, moves i the field of an electro-magnet. The periodic phenomenon under 
study can be observed di ctly on a sheet of frosted glass, or recorded on a photographic 
tape. 

(b) Soft iron and graver typ oscillographs, with a coil acting on a strip of soft iron placed in 
a constant field. A lightw ight rod, pointed at one end, is fixed to the strip and traces the 
phenomenon (e.g., by cutt ng a coated cellulose acetate tape). 

(c) Cathode-ray oscilloscop s and oscillographs; these operate by recording how a 
cathode-ray beam is d flected by electrostatic or electro-magnetic forces. These 
instruments, which may b in one or moreparts, consist essentially of the cathode-ray tube, 
feeding devices and tran formers, amplifiers, a sweeping or scanning system and other 
auxiliary devices and, so etimes, an electronic switch. Oscilloscopes with a memory, used • 
to examine isolated rapi transient phenomena, are equipped with either a cathode-ray 
memory tube or a numeric memory associated with a cathode-ray tube. In the first type, the 
image of the signal is cap red and maintained on the cathode-ray tube. In the second type, 
the signal is recorded in he memory and can be retrieved at will to be viewed on the 
screen. 

* * 

Spectrum analysers are inst ments which identify the different frequency components of an 
electrical input signal. They e mainly used to analyse electrical quantities. They can also 
analyse ionising radiations, s and waves or other non-electrical quantities when used in 
conjunction with radiation det tors or other devices which can detect non-electrical quantities 
and convert them into elecnica signals. 

* 
* * 

The heading covers transient henomena recorders which are apparatus designed to capture a 
signal and to record it with a vi w to transmitting it later, in an appropriate form, onto a display 
apparatus (television monitor, for example). "Logic analysers", which are apparatus used to 
examine electrical circuits co sisting for the most part of semiconductor devices, are also 
classified here. 

* 
* * 

Instruments and apparatus for easuring or checking electrical quantities may be indicating or 
recording types. 

XVIII-9030-3 



• 90.30 

They may be subdivided, according to their mode of operation, into a number of groups, such 
as : 

(1) Moving-coil instruments, in which the current to be measured passes through a coil free 
to move in the magnetic field provided by a permanent magnet. The pointer is secured to 
the moving coil. 

(2) Moving-iron instruments, in which the pointer is deflected by a solenoid acting upon a 
piece of soft iron fixed to the pointer shaft. 

(3) Electrodynamic instruments, in which the current to be measured passes through fixed 
and moving coils, the moving coils operating in the magnetic field of the fixed coils. The 
pointer is secured to the moving coils. 

(4) Induction instruments, consisting of a pointer shaft on which is mounted a flat disc or 
cylinder which operates in the air gap of an electro-magnet having one or more coils. 

• (5) Thermocouple instruments, in which the current to be measured is passed through a 
heater applied to the hot junction of a bi-metallic thermocouple whose electromotive force 
is then measured. 

(6) Electronically operated instruments based on semiconductor technology with a pointer 
or an opto-electronic display for analogue or digital readout. 

Apart from the above-mentioned types of instruments or apparatus which generally effect direct 
measurements, the heading also includes those which supply the operator with certain data from 
which the quantity to be measured can be calculated (comparative method). This group 
includes, in particular, measuring bridges and potentiometers. These are usually mounted in 
boxes or cases containing one or more galvanometers, standard resistors, standard capacitors, 
standard inductors, standard cells, transformers, converters, switches, etc. Measuring bridges are 
often named after their inventor (Wheatstone, Thomson, Anderson, Maxwell, Sauty, Schering, 
Kohlrausch, Wien, etc.); others have names indicating the grouping system of the units of 
comparison (decade pattern bridges, double bridges, T-type bridges, etc.), or the special purpose 
of the bridge (impedance, resistance, capacitance or connection bridges, universal bridges, etc.). 

The following are, however, excluded (Chapter 85) when presented separately : transformers, standard 
resistors, standard capacitors, standard inductors, standard cells, etc.; also earphones (headsets) (used 
instead of the visual null indicator in some types of measuring bridge). 

* 
* * 

The main types of electrical measurements are : 

(I) Measurement of electric currents. This is carried out, in particular, by means of 
galvanometers or amperemeters (ammeters). 

(II) Voltage measurement, by voltmeters, potentiometers, electrometers, etc. The 
electrometers used for measuring very high voltages are electrostatic; they differ from the 
usual type of voltmeter in that they are fitted with spheres or plates held on insulating 
pillars. 

• 
XVIII-9030-4 



90.30 • 
(III) Measurement of resist nce and conductivity, by means of ohmmeters or measuring 

bridges, in particular. 

(IV) Measurement of power by means of wattmeters. 

(V)  Measurement of capaci ance and inductance, effected by means of measuring bridges, 
and expressed in farads r henrys. 

(VI) Measurement of frequ ncies, by means of frequency meters graduated in hertz (cycles 
per second). 

(VII) Measurement of wavel ngths or radio frequencies by wavemeters, or slotted line or 
slotted waveguide instru ents. 

(VIII) Measurement of phas angles or power factors, carried out with phase meters, 
calibrated in power facto s (cos phi). 

(IX) Measurement of the rat os of two electrical quantities by ratiometers. 

(X)	Measurement of magnetic fields or magnetic fluxes, effected with galvanometers or 
fluxmeters. • 

(XI) Measurement of the el ctrical or magnetic properties of materials, carried out with 
hysteresis testers, perme meters or similar instruments. 

(XII) Testing of synchronis e , by means of synchroscopes, instruments for indicating the 
phase relation and diffi rence in frequency between two periodic phenomena. Such 
instruments can be reco nised by the fact that their dials bear the indications "Fast" and 
"Slow" (with correspon d ng arrows). 

(XIII) Measurement and reco •ding of rapid variations of electrical quantities by means of 
the oscilloscopes or oscil ographs described above. 

* * 

Some electrical measuring inst ments can be used for many purposes, for example, electrical 
or electronic instruments kno	as "universal testers" (e.g., multimeters) which serve for the 
rapid measurement of voltages direct or alternating), currents (direct or alternating), resistances 
and capacitances. 

The heading also includes a wide range of electrical or electronic instruments used in 
radio-communications or telec mmunications. In addition to the voltmeters, potentiometers, 
measuring bridges, ammeters wattmeters, phase meters and frequency meters already 
mentioned, this range includes : 

(i)	Impedance testers and ridges, for determining the impedance in a circuit, and also for 
measuring capacitances o inductances. 

(ii) Inductance bridges an similar instruments, for measuring ring inductances on the 
Wheatstone bridge princi le. 

XVIII-9030-5 



• 90.30 

(iii) Nepermeters and decibel meters. These are used for measuring the attenuation over 
long distance telephone circuits. Instruments and apparatus for measuring quantities of 
sound fall in heading 90.27. 

(iv) Fading indicators. Unlike nepermeters (which give measurements based on a 
compensatory system), these give a direct indication of the fading. 

(v) Cross-talk meters, used on telephone circuits for measuring various quantities. 

(vi) Transmission level indicators. 

(vii) Noise level meters, for use on high frequency lines. 

(viii) Gain measuring instruments, for measuring the gain through repeaters relaying long 
distance telephone circuits. 

(ix) Instruments for measuring interference, e.g., noise voltage in long distance telephone 
installations or interference from neighbouring high tension circuits. 

• (x) Psophometers, instruments for calculating line-noise, i.e., the electromotive force of a 
source of current which would produce the same interference if substituted for the 
voltages induced in the telephone circuit. 

(xi) Peak indicators, for recording short voltage peaks such as occur in transmission systems 
(e.g., long distance telephone cables, radio transmission circuits, shortwave links). 

(xii) Echo meters, used in establishing line balance by direct readings of echo expressed in 
nepers or decibels. 

(xiii) Distortion factor meters, for measuring the harmonic distortion introduced into complex 
transmissions. 

Some of the above instruments, in particular those used for electro-acoustic measurements, are 
calibrated in nepers or decibels. 

This heading also covers other instruments and apparatus which perform operations of a kind 
described in the heading, including valve testing or measuring instruments, in particular 
those for testing radio valves. These valve testing or measuring instruments are sometimes 
designed so as to produce the characteristic curve of the valve on the screen of an oscilloscope. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
separately presented parts and accessories of instruments or appliances of this heading remain 
classified here. Examples of these are : coincidence units, electronic, for use with 
Geiger-Milller counters or proportional counters, solid scintillators in the form of crystals or of 
elements of plastics, mounted or metal-sheathed, designed solely for fitting to detection 
instruments, neutron detector tubes using boron, boron trifluoride, hydrogen or fissionable 
elements. 

• 
XVIII-9030-6 



90.31 • 
90.31 - Measuring or chec ig instruments, appliances and machines, not specified or 

included elsewhere in his Chapter; profile projectors (+). 

9031.10 - Machines f r balancing mechanical parts 

9031.20 - Test bench s 

- Other optic 1 instruments and appliances : 

9031.41 - - For insp cting semiconductor wafers or devices or for inspecting 
photomas s or reticles used in manufacturing semiconductor devices 

9031.49 - - Other 

9031.80 - Other instru ents, appliances and machines 

9031.90 - Parts and accessories 

In addition to profile project rs, this heading covers measuring or checking instruments, 
appliances and machines, wh ether or not optical. It should, however, be noted that this group 
does not include any instrum nts, apparatus, etc., falling in headings 90.01 to 90.12 or 90.15 
to 90.30; in particular, the follo wing are therefore excluded : 

Astronomical instruments of eading 90.05. 

Microscopes (heading 90.11 r 90.12). 

Surveying, etc., instruments a id appliances of heading 90.15. 

Instruments for measuring len th, for use in the hand (heading 90.17). 

Medical, surgical, etc., instru ents and appliances of heading 90.18. 

Machines or appliances for to ting the mechanical properties of materials (heading 90.24). 

Flowmeters, etc., of heading 0.26. 

Instruments and apparatus f r measuring and checking electrical quantities and instruments and 
apparatus for measuring or de ecting ionising radiations of heading 90.30. 

Automatic regulating or contr lling instruments and apparatus (heading 90.32). 

(I) MEASU I ING OR CHECKING INSTRUMENTS, 
AP PLIANCES AND MACHINES 

(A) 

These include : 

(1) Machines for balancing mechanical parts (dynamic, static or with an electronic 
balancing device) e.g., a attires, rotors, crank shafts, connecting rods, propeller shafts, 
wheels, flywheels. 

In dynamic machines, the parts are rotated on two bearing blocks or between centres, the 
out-of-balance being mea ured mechanically (tracing of diagrams on a recording plate, 
spring balance principle, e c.). 

Static balancing machine operate on the tilting principle, the out-of-balance being 
measured on scales or di ls. They differ from dynamic machines in that the part to be 
balanced does not rotate. 

XVIII-9031-1 



• 90.31 

Out-of-balances are compensated either by counterweights or removal of material. 

On machines fitted with an electronic balancing device, the vibrations due to unbalance are 
detected by a special sensitive element and are then amplified. 

This heading also covers balancing machines fitted with a machine-tool (drilling-machine, 
for example) and used exclusively for rectifying out-of-balances. 

(2) Test benches for engines and motors, electrical generators, pumps, speed indicators or 
tachometers, etc., consisting of a frame and a measuring or calibrating instrument. 

(3) Laboratory appliances of a kind used for testing fuels and in particular for measuring the 
octane index of petroleum or the cetane index of diesel engine oils. This apparatus usually 
consists of an internal combustion engine, a dynamo, an ignition generator, heating 
resistors, measuring instruments (thermometers, pressure gauges, voltmeters, ammeters, 
etc.). 

(4) Apparatus for testing and regulating vehicle motors, for checking all parts of the 

• ignition system (coils, sparking plugs, condensers, batteries, etc.), for ascertaining the best 
carburettor setting (by analysing exhaust gases), or for measuring the compression in the 
cylinders. 

(5) Planimeters, for measuring plane areas (e.g., on plans, diagrams, skins or hides). A tracing 
point combined with a measuring device follows the outline of the area to be measured. 

Integrators, harmonic analysers and other instruments are based on the planimetric 
principle and capable of measuring other factors (e.g., volume, moments of inertia). 

(6) Head contour measurers, used by hatters, which operate by perforating a sheet of paper. 

(7) Dial indicating comparators, micrometric devices, electronic, opto-electronic and 
pneumatic sensors, whether or not automatic, as well as all devices or instruments for 
measuring length, angles or other geometrical quantities using such sensors. The heading 
also includes recording comparators, and comparators fitted with a mechanical device 
which conveys mass produced parts to the comparator and eliminates defective parts. 

However, this heading does not include the dial type comparators for use in the hand described in 
Item (4) of Part (D) of the Explanatory Note to heading 90.17 (see exclusion (d) above). 

(8)  Column-type gauges for checking precision set squares, for checking heights or for other 
checks during manufacturing processes. 

(9)  Sine bars and adjustable table sine bars for checking angles. 

(10) Bubble levels, used in numerous trades, including micrometric adjustable levels (bubble 
level with built-in micrometer), block levels (metal frame with two levels) used in 
engineering, and liquid levels based on the communicating vessels principle. 

It should be noted that the heading excludes levels specialised for surveying purposes 
(heading 90.15). 

• 
XVIII-9031-2 



90.31 • 
(11) Clinometers (pointer or gcaticule types, clinometer-rules, clinometer-protractors) to check 

a level as compared with horizontal plane, or to measure surface inclination. 

However, the instruments, al o called clinometers, used in surveying to gauge the height of land, are 
excluded (heading 90.15). 

(12) Plumb-lines. 

(13) Spherometers to measur the curvature of spherical surfaces (lenses, mirrors, spectacle 
lenses, etc.). These cons st essentially of a base with three pins (at the angles of an 
equilateral triangle), a divided rule and a micrometric screw with feeler. Other types 
(opticians' lens measurers may be fitted with a dial to indicate the curvature directly. 

(14) Checking standards. 

(15) Multidimensional meas ing equipment, including Co-ordinate Measuring Machines 
(CMMs) used to perform imensional checks, either manually or mechanically, on various 
components or parts of m hines. 

(16) Opticians' centring mac ines for determining and marking the axis and centre of a lens. 

(17) Micrometric standard easuring machines, based on the micrometer principle. These 
consist of a fixed tailsto k (with a contact indicator) and an adjustable headstock with 
micrometer screw. 

(18) Apparatus for measuring or detecting vibrations, expansion, shock or jarring, used on 
machines, bridges, dams, etc. 

(19) Apparatus for checking t xtile materials, for example, yarn grading winding reels (warp 
reels), for obtaining a deter mined length of yarn or slivers, (with or without tension regulator, 
counter and bell); torsi i meters and torsiographs for determining torsion of yarn; 
tensiometers for measuri g tension of yarn on textile machines (warping, spool winding, 
spinning, etc.); instrumen s for checking the regularity of yarn by winding on a drum or 
board, usually comprising device for checking the interval between windings. 

(20) Surface-finish testing instruments and machines for gauging the condition of surface. 

In mechanical or pneumatic types the gauging is done by means of a hard contact point or 
air jets. 

In electrical types a sapplf e or diamond pick-up moves across the surface to be tested and 
converts any irregularities f that surface into an electric potential. The vertical movements 
of the pick-up are convert d into the electric potential by means of a piezo-electric crystal 
or, indirectly, by being ade to vary the value of a capacitor or inductor. The electric 
potential is then amplifi d and measured. Comparison of the measurement with the 
readings obtained by use of selected surface roughness standards (small metal plates 
supplied for that purpose) ive a measure of the state of the surface being tested. 

(21) Gear testing machines u ing, for example, a lever amplifying system, for testing profile 
forms, pitch diameters, to •t h spacing and rolling contact, etc. (on spur and bevel gears), 
lead, etc. (on helical and w • rm gears). 

XVIII-9031-3 



• 90.31 

(22) Instruments for measuring the contracting of a clay, etc., testpiece taken from a 
ceramic furnace during firing to determine the course of the firing (pyroscopes). These 
instruments are often similar to callipers but are calibrated in arbitrary units. 

(23) Instruments for measuring irregular surfaces (such as skins and hides) by the 
photoelectric process. (The differences in the current from a photoelectric cell depend on 
how much of a uniformly lit glass sheet is covered by the opaque surface under measure.) 

(24) Instruments for measuring the diameter of yarns by the photoelectric process as 
described in Item (23) above. 

(25) Instruments for continuous measurement and checking of the thickness of metal sheets 
or strip in rolling mills, etc. 

(26) Ultrasonic thickness measuring instruments which enable thickness to be ascertained by 
observations made from one side of the material only. 

(27) Instruments for detecting faults, fissures, cracks or other defects in materials (bars, 

• tubes, profiles, machined articles, such as screws, needles, etc.). These operate either by 
observing the cathode-ray screen diagram resulting from magnetic variations, or by direct 
reading of variations in magnetic permeability as indicated on a graduated scale or by the 
use of ultrasonic waves. The latter group includes ultrasonic instruments for checking 
soldered or welded joints, which operate on the principle that any lack of continuity in the 
medium through which the ultrasonic waves pass deflects the beam. Defects may be 
measured by either observing the attenuation of the beam or by echo methods. The 
observation may be made on a cathode-ray tube screen. 

(28) Special instruments for checking watches or watch parts. These include : 

(i) Instruments for checking hairsprings. 

(ii) Amplitude meters for checking the amplitude of the oscillations of the balance wheel. 
A light beam, which is interrupted by the movement of the balance wheel, is projected 
on to a photoelectric cell which thus gives a measure of the amplitude. 

(iii)Oscillometers for testing and checking complete watch movements. The watch 
movement is placed on a microphone, and each tick of the watch produces a potential 
which is amplified and applied to two electrodes. One of the electrodes is fitted with 
points which thus perforate a record on a paper strip. 

(iv) Instruments for the final check of the watch. These operate on the same principle as 
oscillometers (recording the ticking of the watch placed on a microphone) but may also 
be fitted with a cathode-ray oscilloscope. 

(29) Special electrical instruments for measuring stress and strain. They are based, for 
example, on the following principles : 

(i) Variations in the resistance of a wire when subjected to stress (strain gauges). 
However, electrical resistors known as "strain gauges" fall in heading 85.33. 

• 
XVIII-9031-4 



90.31 • 
(ii) Variations of capacity between specially constructed electrodes. 

(iii)Electric potentials produced by quartz or similar crystals when subjected to pressure. 

This group also includes dynamometers, used to measure the compression or tractive 
force of hydraulic presses  , rolling mills, material testing machines, etc., and also for load 
tests (aircraft). They usual  ly consist of a metal body (cylinder, ring, etc.) to which stress is 
applied, and of a measur ng apparatus, graduated in units of weight, which records any 
change in the shape of the metal body. 

However, dynamometers for testing the properties of materials are excluded (heading 90.24). 

(30) Load cells which convey changes in applied force (including weight) into proportional 
changes in voltage. Thes changes in voltage are generally detected by instruments for 
measuring, controlling, w ighing, etc., and are expressed in the desired units. 

(31) Electronic chronograph and chronoscopes for measuring the duration of an electric 
contact. These consist of capacitor which is charged through a high resistance whilst the 
contact is closed; the mea urement is made on a valve voltmeter calibrated in time units. 

(B) 

This heading also covers optic 1 type measuring and checking appliances and instruments, such 
as : 

Optical or graduated sc ile comparators, for checking the dimensions of a part being 
manufactured against a s andard piece; the movement of the feeler is magnified by an 
optical device (revolving irror principle). 

Comparator benches fo r checking elongation, lengths, surfaces, etc. These incorporate 
table and frame, sliding cai riage and two mounted micrometric microscopes. 

Measuring benches for la rge parts, thread gauges, gear cutters, threaded shafts for lathes, 
cross members, etc. Th se incorporate frame and table, viewing microscope, two 
micrometric microscopes nd projection apparatus. 

Interferometers, for chec king plane surfaces. These are based on the principle of light 
interference, and comprise a standard optical flat and lenses with micrometric cross wires 
for measuring the interfe rence bands. But the heading excludes standard optical flats 
(heading 90.01), and inter erometers for measuring refractive indices (heading 90.27). 

Optical surface testers, f r gauging the condition of surfaces by means of a combination 
of a prism and a lens. 

Apparatus equipped wi t h rapid impulse differential feeler and optical viewer, for 
photographically recording and measuring profiles and conditions of surfaces. 

Alignment telescopes, ft r checking straightness of benches or machine slides and 
measuring metallic constru ctions. They are operated by collimation or auto-collimation and 
comprise a telescope and a collimator or mirror. 

XVIII-9031-5 



• 90.31 

(8) Optical rules, for measuring deviations from the plane; they incorporate a hollow rule with 
a prism and lens at each end, and an eyepiece micrometer incorporating a feeler. 

(9) Micrometric reading apparatus for checking movement of tables of machine-tools; they 
incorporate a micrometric device for reading off millimetre graduations on individual 
scales. 

(10) Optical goniometers or angle gauges, for checking sharpening angles of teeth or blades 
(front rake) during sharpening. They incorporate either an optical device with lens and 
mirrors and a dial for reading off the angle of incidence, or a shutter system forming a 
mirror and an adjustable eyepiece. 

(11) Focimeters, for taking measurements of spectacle lenses. 

The apparatus and instruments mentioned above remain classified in this heading whether or not 
they are suitable for mounting on machines. 

It should, however, be noted that heading 84.66 covers fittings for adjusting the work or tools on 
machine-tools or water-jet cutting machines, including "optical' fittings (e.g., "optical" dividing heads 

• and "optical" circular tables) incorporating optical devices to assist in reading scales, in carrying out 
adjustments, etc. 

(II) PROFILE PROJECTORS 

Profile projectors, used for checking the shape and dimensions of a wide variety of objects 
(pieces cut to shape, gears and pinions for small-sized mechanisms, screws, screw-taps, chasers, 
etc.), or for examining surfaces. In the majority of these projectors, light from a lamp is 
concentrated into a beam by a condenser before being directed on to the specimen, which is 
placed on a stage. The specimen is silhouetted in the beam which, after being reflected several 
times, is finally projected, by a set of prisms, on to a screen which is generally built in to the 
projector. Some of these projectors are fitted with an intermediate stage on which a standard 
part is placed. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
the heading also covers parts and accessories identifiable as being suitable for use solely or 
principally with the machines, apparatus and instruments described above, e.g., planimeter 
arms, stands and checking tables for dial comparators. 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 9031.49 

This subheading covers not only instruments and appliances which provide a direct aid or enhancement to 
human vision, but also other instruments and apparatus which function through the use of optical 
elements or processes. 

• 



90.32 • 
90.32 - Automatic regulating r controlling instruments and apparatus. 

9032.10 - Thermostat 

9032.20 - Manostats 

- Other instru ments and apparatus : 

9032.81 - - Hydraulic or pneumatic 

9032.89 - - Other 

9032.90 - Parts and ac essories 

In accordance with Note 7 to t is Chapter, this heading covers : 

(A) Instruments and apparatu s for automatically controlling the flow, level, pressure or other 
variables of liquids or gas es, or for automatically controlling temperature, whether or not 
their operation depends o an electrical phenomenon which varies according to the factor 
to be automatically contro led, which are designed to bring this factor to, and maintain it at, 
a desired value, stabilised against disturbances, by constantly or periodically measuring its 
actual value; and 

(B) Automatic regulators o electrical quantities, and instruments or apparatus for 
automatically controlling on-electrical quantities, the operation of which depends on an 
electrical phenomenon va i ing according to the factor to be controlled, which are designed 
to bring this factor to, and aintain it at, a desired value, stabilised against disturbances, by 
constantly or periodically easuring its actual value. 

(I) INSTRUMENT AND APPARATUS FOR AUTOMATICALLY 
CONTROLLING THE F ] OW, LEVEL, PRESSURE OR OTHER VARIABLES 

OF LIQUIDS R GASES, OR FOR AUTOMATICALLY 
CO (TROLLING TEMPERATURE 

Automatic control apparat u s for liquids or gases and apparatus for automatically 
controlling temperature fo rt n part of complete automatic control systems and consist 
essentially of the following dev i ces : 

(A) A device for measurin g the variable to be controlled (pressure or level in a tank, 
temperature in a room, etc ); in some cases, a simple device which is sensitive to changes 
in the variable (metal or b i -metal rod, chamber or bellows containing an expanding liquid, 
float, etc.) may be used ins tread of a measuring device. 

(B) A control device which c mpares the measured value with the desired value and actuates 
the device described in (C) below accordingly. 

(C) A starting, stopping or o erating device. 

Apparatus for automatically co trolling liquids or gases or temperature, within the meaning of 
Note 7 (a) to this Chapter, consists of these three devices forming a single entity or in 
accordance with Note 3 to this hapter, a functional unit. 

Some instruments and apparatu do not incorporate devices which compare the measured value 
with the desired value. They are directly activated by means of a switch, e.g., when the 
predetermined value is reached. 

XVIII-9032-1 



• 90.32 

Instruments and apparatus for automatically controlling the flow, level, pressure and other 
variables of liquids or gases or for automatically controlling temperature are connected to an 
appliance which carries out the orders (pump, compressor, valve, furnace burner, etc.) which 
restores the variable (e.g., liquid measured in a tank or temperature measured in a room) to the 
prescribed value, or which, in the case of a safety system, for instance, stops the operation of the 
machine or apparatus controlled. This appliance, generally remote controlled by a mechanical, 
hydraulic, pneumatic or electric control, is to be classified in its own appropriate heading (pump 
or compressor : heading 84.13 or 84.14; valve : heading 84.81, etc.). If the automatic control 
apparatus is combined with the appliance which carries out the orders, the classification of the 
whole is to be determined under either Interpretative Rule 1 or Interpretative Rule 3 (b) (see 
Part (III) of the General Explanatory Note to Section XVI and the Explanatory Note to 
heading 84.81). 

This group includes : 

(A) Pressure controllers or regulators, also called manostats. These consist essentially of a 
pressure sensitive device, a controlling device which compares (e.g., by means of an 
adjustable spring) the pressure to be controlled with the prescribed pressure, and an electric 

• contact or a small valve operating a servo-circuit. 

This apparatus may be used, for instance, to control a motor pump or compressor which 
supplies a pressure tank, or to operate pneumatic valve positioners, or with a valve to 
regulate the flow, pressure, etc., of liquids or gases. 

These pressure regulators differ from the pressure reducing valves of heading 84.81 
(sometimes also called "pressure regulators"). 

(B) Level regulators or controllers for the automatic control of a level. 

In the float-type level controller, the float acts on a diaphragm or a magnetic or other 
device which operates an electric switch; this in turn switches on or off a pump, a valve, 
etc. 

In the electrode system the liquid is connected to earth and forms part of the circuit. One 
pole of the transformer is also earthed. When the surface of the liquid comes into contact 
with the electrode, the circuit is closed and a relay comes into operation. 

(C) Humidity regulators, sometimes also called humidistats, are instruments for 
automatically controlling humidity in steaming cabinets, furnaces, workshops, warehouses, 
etc. 

The operation depends on variations in the length of a bundle of hair or some other element 
sensitive to humidity and they generally operate a signalling device or control an apparatus 
which can modify the degree of humidity found (steam input valve, humidifier or 
de-humidifier, fan, etc.). 

(D) Thermostats are used for automatically controlling temperature. The main components of 
a thermostat are : 

(1) An element sensitive to changes in temperature whose action may depend on : 

(a) The change in shape of a bi-metal strip (straight, U or spiral-shaped, etc.); 

(b) The vapour pressure of a liquid; 

(c) The expansion of a liquid or of a metal rod; 

(d) An electrical resistor or a thermocouple. 

• 
XVIII-9032-2 



  

 

90.32 • 
In bi-metal strip the ostats, the strip is fixed inside a plunger tube or in a case. In 
metal rod thermostats, the rod fits in a plunger tube. In vapour pressure or liquid types, 
the sensitive element may consist of a folded diaphragm enclosing a fluid, or of a 
system incorporating diaphragm, a capillary tube and a bulb or elbow. 

(2) A drum, disc or other evice for pre-setting the desired temperature. 

(3) A triggering or oper mg device which consists mainly, depending on the type of 
transmission used (m chanical, servo-fluid, electrical), of a lever assembly, springs, 
etc., a valve, or an e ectrical switch. This device operates a signal or an appliance 
(generally remote) such as a steam or hot water intake valve, boiler burner, air 
conditioning unit, fan, etc., which regulates the temperature. 

Thermostats are used , it particular, for controlling temperature in houses or other 
buildings, in ovens, cooke s, boilers, water heaters, cold storage installations, chimneys or 
flues, steaming apparatus r cabinets, and other industrial or laboratory equipment. 

(E) Temperature regulators for setting and maintaining pre-set temperatures on electrical 
heating appliances (cooke s, grills, percolators, etc.) consist essentially of a bi-metal strip 
which, when deflected by the heat from a shunt resistor on the power circuit, operates a 
switch to make and break he power circuit, the "On" and "Off" periods (and consequently 
the temperature of the he ting. elements) being determined by the position of a manual 
control dial; the "Full" ►osition renders the bi-metal assembly inoperative and thus, 
particularly in the initial tages of heating, permits continuous operation of the heating 
element. 

This heading excludes : 

(a) "Thermostatic" or "the mostat" steamers, cabinets, etc., in which the temperature is kept 
constant by means of a th ermostat, which are to be classified in their respective headings. 

(b) Thermostatically controll ed valves (heading 84.81). 

(F) Oven-draught regulators are used, for example, in central heating or air conditioning 
plants, to control automatic ally the air intake by reference to the temperature, pressure, etc. 

(II) AUTOMATIC REGULATORS OF ELECTRICAL QUANTITIES,AND 
INSTRUMENTS OR APRATUS FOR AUTOMATICALLY CONTROLLING 

NON-ELECTRICAL QUANTITIES THE OPERATION OF WHICH 
DEPENDS ON AN ELECTRICAL PHENOMENON VARYING ACCORDING 

TO TH FACTOR TO BE CONTROLLED 

The automatic regulators of th's heading are intended for use in complete automatic control 
systems which are designed to bring a quantity, electrical or non-electrical, to, and maintain it 
at, a desired value, stabilised a ainst any disturbances, by constantly or periodically measuring 
its actual value. They consist es entially of the following devices : 

(A) A measuring device (se sing device, converter, resistance probe, thermocouple, etc.) 
which determines the actu 1 value of the variable to be controlled and converts it into a 
proportional electrical sign 1. 

XVIII-9032-3 



• 90.32 

(B) An electrical control device which compares the measured value with the desired value 
and gives a signal (generally in the form of a modulated current). 

(C) A starting, stopping or operating device (generally contacts, switches or circuit breakers, 
reversing switches or, sometimes, relay switches) which supplies current to an actuator in 
accordance with the signal received from the control device. 

An automatic regulator within the meaning of Note 7 (b) to this Chapter consists of the devices 
described in (A), (B) and (C) above, whether assembled together as a single entity or in 
accordance with Note 3 to this Chapter, a functional unit. 

If they do not conform to the definitions outlined above, these devices are to be classified as 
follows : 

(1) Electrical measuring devices generally fall in heading 90.25, 90.26 or 90.30. 

(2) Electrical control devices are to be classified in this heading as incomplete automatically 

• controlling instruments or apparatus. 

(3) Starting, stopping or operating devices are generally to be classified in heading 85.36 
(switches, relays, etc.). 

Automatic regulators are connected to an electrical, pneumatic or hydraulic actuator, which 
brings the controlled variable back to the desired value. This actuator may be the clamps which 
adjust the gap between the electrodes of an arc furnace, the motorised valve which controls the 
intake of water or steam in a boiler, a furnace, a pulping machine, etc. 

The actuators are to be classified in their own appropriate headings (adjustable clamp : 
heading 84.25; motorised or solenoid valve : heading 84.81; electro-magnetic positioner : 
heading 85.05; etc.). If the automatic regulator is combined with the actuator, the classification 
of the whole is to be determined under either Interpretative Rule 1 or Interpretative Rule 3 (b) 
(see Part (III) of the General Explanatory Note to Section XVI and the Explanatory Note to 
heading 84..81). 

Electronic regulators function on a strictly electrical principle, and not electro-mechanically. 
Their characteristic features are semiconductors (transistors) or integrated circuits. 

These regulators are used not only for electrical quantities, such as voltage, amperage, 
frequency and power, but also for other quantities such as revolutions per minute, torque, 
traction force, level, pressure, flow or temperature. 

This heading also excludes : 

(a) Cut-outs combined, in a single housing, with a voltage regulator or a current regulator, for use in 
conjunction with internal combustion piston engines (heading 85.11). 

(b) "Programmable controllers" of heading 85.37. 

PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

Subject to the provisions of Notes 1 and 2 to this Chapter (see the General Explanatory Note), 
parts and accessories of apparatus or appliances of this heading remain classified here. 

• 
XVIII-9032-4 



90.33 • 
90.33 - Parts and accessorie (not specified or included elsewhere in this Chapter) for 

machines, appliances, nstruments or apparatus of Chapter 90. 

This heading covers all parts a d accessories for machines, appliances, instruments or apparatus 
of this Chapter, other than : 

(1) Those mentioned in Chapter 'ote 1, e.g. : 

(a) Optical elements of glas , not optically worked (Chapter 70). 

(b) Articles of a kind used i machines, appliances, instruments or apparatus, of vulcanised rubber 
other than hard rubber (:.g., rubber gaskets, washers and the like) (heading 40.16), of leather or 
of composition leather e.g., leather diaphragms for gas meters) (heading 42.05) or of textile 
material (heading 59.11 

(c) Parts of general use, as efined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV) or similar 
goods of plastics (Chap er 39). 

(2) Those covered by Chapter ote 2 (a), which constitute in themselves machines, appliances, 
instruments or apparatus of y particular heading of Chapter 90 or of Chapter 84, 85 or 91 (other 
than the residual headings 4.87, 85.48 or 90.33). It therefore follows that separately presented 
articles of this type must be classified in their respective headings. Examples of such goods mclude : 

(a)  Vacuum pumps (heading 84.14), taps or valves (heading 84.81), gears (heading 84.83). 

(b)  Electrical motors (heading 85.01), transformers (heading 85.04 permanent magnets and 
electro-magnets (headi g 85.05), primary cells (heading 85.06), audio-frequency electric 
amplifiers (heading 85 18), capacitors of heading 85.32, resistors (heading 85.33), relays 
(heading 85.36), tubes or valves (heading 85.40), photocells of heading 85.41, high or 
intermediate frequency a plifiers (heading 85.43). 

(c) Optical elements of hea ing 90.01 or 90.02. 

(d) Photographic cameras (h • ading 90.06), thermometers and hygrometers (heading 90.25). 

(e) Clock or watch moveme is (heading 91.08 or 91.09). 

(3) Those identifiable as suitabl for use solely or principally with a particular kind of machine, 
appliance, instrument or ap aratus, or with a number of machines, appliances, instruments or 
apparatus of the same headi g of this Chapter; these are classifiable, by application of Chapter 
Note 2 (b), in the same headin as the relevant machines, appliances, instruments or apparatus. 

XVIII-9033-1 



• 91 

Chapter 91 

Clocks and watches and parts thereof 

Notes. 
1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Clock or watch glasses or weights (classified according to their constituent material); 

(b) Watch chains (heading 71.13 or 71.17, as the case may be); 

(c) Parts of general use defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV), or similar 
goods of plastics (Chapter 39) or of precious metal or metal clad with precious metal (generally 
heading 71.15); clock or watch springs are, however, to be classified as clock or watch parts 
(heading 91.14); 

(d) Bearing balls (heading 73.26 or 84.82, as the case may be); 

• (e) Articles of heading 84.12 constructed to work without an escapement; 

(f) Ball bearings (heading 84.82); or 

(g) Articles of Chapter 85, not yet assembled together or with other components into watch or clock 
movements or into articles suitable for use solely or principally as parts of such movements 
(Chapter 85). 

2.- Heading 91.01 covers only watches with case wholly of precious metal or of metal clad with precious 
metal, or of the same materials combined with natural or cultured pearls, or precious or semi-precious 
stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed) of headings 71.01 to 71.04. Watches with case of base 
metal inlaid with precious metal fall in heading 91.02. 

3.- For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "watch movements" means devices regulated by a 
balance-wheel and hairspring, quartz crystal or any other system capable of determining intervals of 
time, with a display or a system to which a mechanical display can be incorporated. Such watch 
movements shall not exceed 12 mm in thickness and 50 mm in width, length or diameter. 

4.- Except as provided in Note 1, movements and other parts suitable for use both in clocks or watches 
and in other articles (for example, precision instruments) are to be classified in this Chapter. 

GENERAL 

This Chapter covers certain apparatus designed mainly for measuring time or for effecting some 
operation in relation to time. It includes timepieces suitable for carrying on the person (watches 
and stop-watches), other timepieces (ordinary clocks, clocks with watch movements, alarm 
clocks, marine chronometers, clocks for motor vehicles, etc.), and also time recording apparatus, 
time interval measuring instruments and time switches; in general, it also covers parts of these 
articles. 

The articles of this Chapter may be of any material (including precious metals) and they may be 
decorated or trimmed with natural or cultured pearls, or natural, synthetic or reconstructed 
precious or semi-precious stones (see the Explanatory Notes to headings 91.11 and 91.12). 

The classification of clocks and watches combined with some other object (an article of 
furniture, a lamp, inkstand, paperweight, writing-pad, tobacco jar, cigarette or cigar lighter, 
handbag, powder compact, cigarette case, propelling-pencil, walking-stick, etc.) is governed by 
the Rules for the Interpretation of the Nomenclature. The mere inclusion of internal lighting 
does not remove clocks or watches from this Chapter. 

• 
XVIII-91-1 



  

91 • 
In addition to the exclusions spec feed in the Explanatory Note to each heading, this Chapter excludes, 
inter alia : 

(a) Sundials and hour-glasses (cl ssified according to their constituent material). 

(b) Musical automatons (mechanical singing birds and the like) and musical boxes without time dials 
(heading 92.08). 

(c) Toy clocks and watches and Christmas tree accessories in the form of clocks or watches, such as 
those without clock or watch ovements (heading 95.03 or 95.05). 

(d) Automata and other animated isplays of a kind used for shop window dressing (heading 96.18). 
(e) Works of art, collectors' piece., and antiques (Chapter 97). 

A clock or watch is compose of two main parts : the movement and the container for the 
movement (case, cabinet, etc.). 

Mechanical watch or clock m vements consist of the following parts : 

(1) The body or frame usual y consists of the plate and the bridges. The plate, to which the 
bridges are fixed by screw, and pins, is the basic support of the movement. Some bodies or 
frames incorporate, apart rom the bridges and the plate proper, one or more additional 
plates (called, for exampl , dial plate, lower plate cover) intended to hold in place certain 
parts of the movement (motion work, alarm mechanism, etc.). 

The device which drives the movement, usually consisting of weights or springs; the 
source of energy may a so be electricity, or changes in temperature or atmospheric 
pressure. 

The train, i.e., the succes s ion of toothed wheels which connects the driving device to the 
escapement and enables ti r. ie to be measured. 

The motion work, i.e., the series of parts which links the motion of the minute hand to that 
of the hour hand. In mov e ments with a dial plate, the motion work is generally located 
between the dial plate and he plate. 

The escapement; this pro s ides the pendulum or balance and hairspring with the necessary 
energy and ensures that th e motion of the train is controlled. 

The most usual types of es apement are the anchor or lever, the pin-pallet, the cylinder and 
the detent. 

The regulating device; th s regulates the motion produced by the driving mechanism. It 
consists of a pendulum, balance-wheel and hairspring combination, a tuning fork, a 
piezo-electric quartz crysta or any other system capable of determining intervals of time. 

The winding and hand se sting mechanism (operated by a push piece, a draw piece, or a 
rocking bar, etc.). 

The assembled movement, toge her with the dial and hands, is fitted in the container or case. 

The balance-wheel, the escape ent parts and the train parts are finely pivoted. In the cheaper 
types of clocks and watches, th y are pivoted directly in the metal of the plate and bridges, but 
in better instruments the bearin s are jewelled to resist wear. 

Clocks and watches may be e uipped with a striking work, an alarm mechanism or a set of 
chimes. Each of these devices r quires a special movement. 

XVIII-91-2 



• 91 

Mechanical clocks and watches may be wound by hand, by electricity or automatically. 

The apparatus of this Chapter may be electrical (including electronic), e.g. : 

(A) Clocks using a dry battery or an accumulator with a low running reserve (of the order 
of a few minutes). These clocks have a conventional balance-wheel and hairspring 
combination or a pendulum, the spring being periodically rewound by an electro-magnet. 

(B) Clocks connected to the mains, with a high running reserve (several hours). These are 
also equipped with a normal balance-wheel and hairspring combination or pendulum, the 
spring or weight being rewound periodically by an electric motor (synchronous, induction, 
etc.). 

• (C) Pendulum clocks driven from a dry battery, an accumulator or the mains; the 
pendulum is kept swinging by means of an electro-magnetic device. 

(D) Clocks and watches powered by a dry battery or an accumulator, with a regulating 
device (tuning fork, piezo-electric quartz crystal, etc.) which is kept oscillating by an 
electronic circuit. 

(E) Synchronous motor clocks. These are connected to a controlled frequency current and 
therefore consist solely of the motor and the train, without a controlling device. 

Electric clock systems are dealt with more specifically in the Explanatory Note to 
heading 91.05. 

Some electric clocks are equipped with devices for setting them to the correct time by remote 
control. 

* 
* * 

For the purposes of Note 3 to this Chapter, which defines watch movements, the following 
methods of measurement apply : 

(a) Measurement of thickness 

The thickness of a movement is the distance from the outer plane of the dial support (or the 
visible surface of the display if the latter is incorporated in the movement) to the furthest 
opposite outer plane, without taking account of any screws, nuts or other fixed parts 
projecting beyond that plane. 

(b) Measurement of width, length or diameter 

As appropriate, the width, length or diameter (which are determined by their axis of 
symmetry). is to be measured without taking the winding spindle or crown into 
consideration. 

• 
XVIII-91-3 



   

  

 

  

 

91.01 

91.01 - Wrist-watches, pocke watches and other watches, including stop-watches, with case 
of precious metal or o metal clad with precious metal. 

- Wrist-watc es, electrically operated, whether or not incorporating a stop-
watch facili 

9101.11 - - With mec anical display only 

9101.19 - - Other 

- Other wrist- atches, whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility : 

9101.21 - - With auto atic winding 

9101.29 - - Other 

- Other : 

9101.91 - - Electricall operated 

9101.99 - - Other 

The Explanatory Note to headir  g 91.02 applies, mutatis mutandis, to this heading. 

In accordance with Note 2 to t is Chapter, watches of this heading must have cases wholly of 
precious metal or of metal clac with precious metal. They may be set with gem stones or with 
natural or cultured pearls and nay be fitted with a cover or have a bracelet of precious metal 
(gem set or not). 

In accordance with Note 7 to Chapter 71, the expression "metal clad with precious metal" 
means material made with a ba e of metal upon one or more surfaces of which there is affixed, 
by soldering, brazing, welding, hot-rolling or similar mechanical means, a covering of precious 
metal. 

However, watches with case of pre ious metal or of metal clad with precious metal, having a steel back, fall 
in heading 91.02, as do watches wi case of base metal inlaid with precious metal. 

XVIII-9 101-1 



• 91.02 

91.02 - Wrist-watches, pocket-watches and other watches, including stop-watches, other 
than those of heading 91.01. 

- Wrist-watches, electrically operated, whether or not incorporating a stop-
watch facility : 

9102.11 - - With mechanical display only 

9102.12 - - With opto-electronic display only 

9102.19 - - Other 

- Other wrist-watches, whether or not incorporating a stop-watch facility : 

9102.21 - - With automatic winding 

9102.29 - - Other 

- Other : 

• 9102.91 - - Electrically operated 

9102.99 - - Other 

This heading covers mechanical and electrical (mostly electronic) timekeeping instruments with 
case and movement, of a kind intended to be worn or carried and designed to function in all 
positions, which indicate the time or measure intervals of time, regardless of the thickness of the 
movement. These include wrist-watches, pocket-watches, fob-watches, watches for carrying in 
handbags, watches mounted in brooches, nngs, etc. 

However, timepieces incorporating a stand, however simple, should not be regarded as watches. 

The heading covers not only watches with simple movements but also those with complex 
systems (i.e., incorporating extra elements in addition to those for simply indicating hours, 
minutes and seconds), for example, chronograph watches, alarm watches, repeaters and striking 
watches, automatic watches, calendar watches and watches indicating the working reserve. 

The heading includes fancy or special-feature watches, such as watertight, shock-proof or 
antimagnetic watches; eight-day watches; self-winding watches; watches with luminous dials 
and hands; watches with centre-seconds hands or special dials; handless watches; sports 
watches (e.g., watches for skin divers, with built-in depth indicator); Braille watches. 

• Chronometer watches are high precision watches which have been tested in different positions 
and at variable temperatures. This group also includes deck watches, but not marine 
chronometers and the like (heading 91.05). 

Chronograph watches not only show the time of day but can also be used to measure 
comparatively short periods of time. Those with hands have two special hands in addition to the 
usual three hands (for hours, minutes and seconds), i.e., a centre-seconds hand, which makes 
one complete revolution per minute and can be started, stopped and brought back to zero by 
means of a pendant or knob, and a hand which records how many minutes the centre-seconds 
hand has been in operation. Certain chronograph watches have a further seconds hand. 

• 
XVIII-9102-1 



91.02 • 
The heading also covers stop- atches. Those with hands differ from the chronograph watches 
described above in that they do not have the usual hour, minute and seconds hands, but only the 
centre-seconds hand (with or ithout a further seconds hand) and the minute recording hand. 
However, electronic stop watch s frequently have a subsidiary facility to indicate the time of day. 

Chronograph watches and stop watches may mark fifths, tenths, hundredths and thousandths of 
a second. They are sometimes equipped with special devices so that the speed of a runner, a 
motor vehicle, sound, etc., th e pulse rate, the output of a machine, etc., can be determined 
without calculation. Certain of hese may also have devices for recording the time. 

Wrist-straps presented with th e it watches (whether or not attached) are classified in this heading. 

The heading excludes the follow' g when separately presented : watch cases and parts of watch cases 
(heading 91.11), watch moveme is (heading 91.08 or 91.10), watch straps, watch bands and watch 
bracelets (heading 91.13) and part of movements (generally heading 91.10 or 91.14). 

The heading further excludes : 

(a) Pedometers (heading 90.29). 

(b) Clocks with watch movement (heading 91.03). 

(c) Instrument panel clocks and clocks of a similar type, for vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels 
(heading 91.04). 

XVIII-9 1 02-2 



• 91.03 

91.03 - Clocks with watch movements, excluding clocks of heading 91.04. 

9103.10 - Electrically operated 

9103.90 - Other 

This heading covers clocks (including alarm clocks but excluding clocks of heading 91.04) 
provided they are equipped with watch movements, and are essentially constructed for 
indicating the time of day. Under Chapter Note 3, the expression "watch movements" in this 
heading means devices regulated by a balance-wheel and hairspring, quartz crystal or any other 
system capable of determining intervals of time, with a display or a system to which a 
mechanical display can be incorporated. Such watch movements shall not exceed 12 mm in 
thickness and 50 mm in width, length or diameter. 

It should however be noted that the heading excludes : 

(a) Instrument panel clocks and clocks of a similar type, for vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels; these 
are classified in heading 91.04 regardless of the type or thickness of the movement. 

• (b) Clocks (including alarm clocks) which do not satisfy the conditions specified in the first paragraph, 
for example, pendulum clocks, clocks with any other regulating system capable of determining 
intervals of time and exceeding 12 mm in thickness or exceeding 50 mm in width, length or diameter 
and clocks with movements without a regulating system (e.g., driven by synchronous motor). These 
fall in heading 91.05. 

Alarm clocks are equipped with a striking mechanism (usually with the clock case acting as 
gong) which is set off at a given time of day fixed in advance by means of a special hand. The 
striking mechanism is sometimes replaced by a musical device. 

Provided they have watch movements, the heading covers, inter alia : 

(i) Household or office clocks (including alarm clocks) on feet, on stands, etc. 

(ii) Travelling clocks with cases. 

(iii) Calendar clocks. 

(iv) Eight-day clocks. 

(v) Clocks which strike the hours. 

• (vi) Clocks with luminous dials and hands. 

The heading excludes the following when separately presented : movements (heading 91.08 or 91.10), 
clock cases (heading 91.12) and parts of movements (generally heading 91.10 or 91.14). 

• 
XVIII-9103-1 



91.04 • 
91.04 - Instrument panel clocks and clocks of a similar type for vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft 

or vessels. 

This heading covers all clock, complete with case and movement, specially constructed for 
mounting in the instrument pa els, steering wheels, rear-view mirrors, etc., of vehicles (motor 
vehicles, motor bicycles, etc. , aircraft, spacecraft or vessels, regardless of the type and 
thickness of the movement. They are usually electric (mostly electronic) clocks, self-winding 
clocks, or mechanical eight-day clocks. 

The heading also covers vehic e chronographs, which, in addition to the usual hands, have a 
chronograph hand, a minute rec a rding hand and a running-time recorder. 

The heading excludes the followi g when presented separately : movements (headings 91.08 to 91.10), 
clock cases (heading 91.12) and p s of movements (generally heading 91.10 or 91.14). 

XVIII-9104-1 



• 91.05 

91.05 - Other clocks. 

- Alarm clocks : 

9105.11 - - Electrically operated 

9105.19 - - Other 

- Wall clocks : 

9105.21 - - Electrically operated 

9105.29 - - Other 

- Other : 

9105.91 - - Electrically operated 

9105.99 - - Other 

• This heading covers timekeepers, not classified elsewhere in the Chapter, essentially 
constructed for indicating the time of day; they must, therefore, have movements other than 
watch movements. Clocks and alarm clocks with watch movements (as defined by Chapter 
Note 3) are excluded (heading 91.03). 

The clocks classified here may be weight, spring, electrically or electronically operated; they are 
generally regulated by a pendulum, a balance-wheel and hairspring, a tuning fork or a 
piezo-electric quartz crystal. They are often equipped with a striking mechanism (hours, 
half-hours, or quarters) acting on a bell or gong, or a multi-gong chiming mechanism. 

Subject to the above conditions, the heading includes : 

Public clocks; clocks for shops, the home, etc.; period clocks; special regional forms of fancy 
clocks (Neuchatel clocks, Paris clocks, cuckoo-clocks, Westminster chiming clocks, etc.); 
"marionette" clocks; coin-operated clocks; astronomical or observatory clocks; self-winding 
clocks (wound, for example, by variations of temperature or atmospheric pressure); alarm 
clocks; centre-seconds clocks; electronic clocks; piezo-electric quartz crystal clocks. 

The heading also includes clocks for electric clock systems as used in towns, factories, 
telephone exchanges, stations, airports, banks, hotels, schools, hospitals, etc. These systems 
consist of a precision-regulated master clock and the secondary clocks which it drives by remote 
control. The master clock has usually a mechanical or electrical movement and a contact device 
for transmitting the driving impulses to the secondary clocks. The secondary clocks, indicating 
the hours and minutes, receive their driving impulses at the end of each minute or half-minute. 
They have an electro-magnet with a rotating or oscillating armature which actuates the train and 
the motion work; each impulse from the master clock advances the minute hand by one minute 
or half-minute. The train may also be driven by an electrically wound spring or directly by an 
electric motor. Seconds-indicating secondary clocks are provided with centre-seconds hands in 
addition to the hour and minute hands. In this case, the master clock must have a special device 
emitting impulses each second, besides the minutes contact. It should, however, be noted that 
the heading excludes secondary clocks with only minute and seconds hands or with seconds 
hands alone (for regulating watches, etc.); these fall in heading 91.06. 

• 
XVIII-9105-1 



91.05 • 
Secondary clocks may be used indoors or outdoors, may have two or more dials, and may be 
designed for placing on a flat sirface such as a table. 

Master clocks sometimes con l other electric appliances, such as time-registers, watchmen's 
tell-tales, switching appliances, recorders, signals (bells, sirens, lamps), beacons or 
ground-lights. 

The heading also includes groups of mains-driven synchronous clocks, and pneumatic 
installations operated by compressed air, used for relaying and synchronising time. 

The heading also covers marine or similar chronometers, i.e., high precision stationary 
timepieces, mainly designed for keeping time on ships though some are also used for scientific 
purposes. These instruments are generally larger than chronometer watches and are fitted in 
boxes; they may or may not be mounted in gymbals. They usually run either two or eight days 
at one winding, and generally have a detent escapement, a fusee, a device for converting the 
force of the mainspring into constant pressure, and a working reserve indicator. 

The heading excludes the following when presented separately : clock cases (heading 91.12), movements 
(heading 91.09 or 91.10) and parts of movements (generally heading 91.10 or 91.14). 
The heading further excludes : 

(a) Deck watches (heading 91.01 or 91.02). 

(b) Instrument panel clocks and :locks of a similar type, for vehicles, aircraft, spacecraft or vessels 
(heading 91.04). 

XVIII-9105-2 



• 91.06 

91.06 - Time of day recording apparatus and apparatus for measuring, recording or 
otherwise indicating intervals of time, with clock or watch movement or with 
synchronous motor (for example, time-registers, time-recorders). 

9106.10 - Time-registers; time-recorders 

9106.90 - Other 

Provided they are operated by a movement of the watch or clock type (including secondary or 
synchronous motor clock movements) or by a synchronous motor with or without reduction 
gear, this heading covers : 

(i) A wide range of apparatus for recording the time of day at which some action or 
operation is effected; 

and (ii) Apparatus, not elsewhere specified, for measuring, recording or otherwise indicating 
intervals of time. 

Such apparatus may have dials indicating hours, minutes or seconds. However, certain 
instruments of this heading, such as time-registers, watchmen's tell-tales and pigeon-timers, are 
sometimes constructed without dials. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Time-registers for recording the arrival and departure of employees in factories, 
workshops, etc. These consist of a case containing a clock, a date marker actuated by the 
clock movement, a hammer and an inking ribbon. The employee inserts his card in the 
machine and operates the hammer either mechanically or electrically, thus stamping the 
card with the exact date, hour and minute. The number of hours he has been present can 
then be calculated from the card. Mechanical eight-day clocks and electric clocks are most 
commonly used. They may be independent, connected to a master clock or themselves 
serve as master clocks. In the last case, they sometimes set off a striking mechanism or a 
siren (see the Explanatory Note to heading 91.05). 

(2) Time-recorders similar to the time-registers described in (1) above but marking also the 
month, the year, a serial number or other indications; some of these instruments are also 
equipped with a device for totalling up working hours (e.g., per day or per week). These 
instruments are also used for stamping mail or accounting documents, dating costing slips, 
etc. 

(3) Watchmen's tell-tales, usually portable. These have a clock movement actuating a paper 
dial or a dating. appliance. By means of a special key, the watchman records his periodical 
visits (hour, minute, number of post) at the control points by perforating or stamping the 
revolving dial, or by printing with an inking tape on a paper strip. 

(4) Pigeon-timers for recording the arrival of homing pigeons at the end of a race. These are 
portable cases containing a clock, a drum for the rings and a device which marks the day, 
hour, minute and second of arrival either by printing on a tape, or by perforating a disc or 
paper band. 

(5) Master frequency control instruments used with systems of synchronous motor clocks, 
time switches, etc. These instruments have a dial indicating the standard time, the time of 
the synchronous motor clock and the time difference between the two. They consist 
essentially of a mechanism for indicating the time differences, a secondary clock 
movement, controlled by a master clock and indicating the standard time, a synchronous 
motor clock movement and various contact, signalling or regulating devices. 

• 
XVIII-9106-1 



91.06 • 
(6) Timers for measuring t duration of short-lived phenomena limited by opening and 

closing electric contacts. hese timers are used for checking electricity supply meters, for 
measuring the speed of luman reactions, etc. Their principal parts are a synchronous 
motor, an electro-magnetic coupling and a meter with a dial indicating seconds and 
hundredths of seconds; t e whole is contained in a case. When the instrument is in 
operation, the synchrono s motor runs continuously and is coupled to the meter for the 
duration of the phenomen n. 

Electric or electronic timers without a movement of the clock type or a synchronous motor are 
excluded (heading 90.31). 

Table or stadium timers for sporting events, indicating time of arrival or playing time in 
minutes and seconds. 

Stadium clocks with clock di is are, however, excluded (heading 91.05). 

Stop-clocks and other ti ers used for measuring the duration of some processes. These 
have a seconds dial, a dial or totalling minutes, and a lever for starting and stopping. 

Timers for registering he duration of telephone conversations; these operate like 
stop-clocks and may have a striking mechanism. 

Time-recorders for sporting events, with synchronous motor movement, usually 
controlled by a quartz cry$tal oscillator. These can record time correctly to one hundredth 
of a second, and also he order of arrival or departure; they may operate either 
photographically, or by pri ting on or perforating a paper tape moving at constant speed. 

Items of auxiliary sporting imekeeping apparatus (stands and holders for timers, starting gates, 
photoelectric cell devices, acoustical, electric or radio telegraphic transmission instruments, etc.) are 
classified in their own appropriate headings. 

(11) Process timers for short p riods of time. These ring a bell after a given number of minutes 
(usually up to 60); they ar equipped with an alarm movement and a dial normally bearing 
the figures 0-10, 0-30 or -60. They are used in all fields where the duration of a process 
must be controlled. 

However, time switches, which differ from process timers in that instead of actuating a striking 
system at a given time, they "make" or "break' an electric circuit, are excluded (heading 91.07). 

(12) Secondary clocks (operated by a master clock) with only minute and seconds hands or 
with seconds hands alone (for regulating watches, etc.). 

(13) Billiards meters which employ a clock movement to indicate the time in play or the 
amount payable based on that time. 

(14) Time clocks for chess-players, consisting of two clock or watch movements with dials 
indicating time in hours and minutes, and two buttons or levers by which the movements 
can be started and stopped. 

The heading excludes the following when presented separately : cases for the apparatus described above 
(classified either in heading 91.12 or in their respective headings, see the Explanatory Note to heading 
91.12), watch or clock movements (headings 91.08 to 91.10), and parts of such movements (generally 
heading 91.10 or 91.14). 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Instruments and apparatus of hapter 90, whether or not having a movement of the watch or clock 
type, but not equipped wit a time dial, such as recording tide gauges and seismo aphs 
(heading 90.15), barographs a id thermographs (heading 90.25), manometers (heading 90.2 , gas, 
liquid or electricity supply or production meters (heading 90.28), revolution counters, production 
counters, speed indicators, tac ometers taximeters, pedometers and instruments and apparatus for 
measuring short time intervals y counting (heading 90.29), opisometers (heading 90.31 . 

(b) Chronometer watches, chrono raph watches and stop-watches (heading 91.01 or 91.02). 

(c) Metronomes (heading 92.09). 

XVIII-9106-2 



• 91.07 

91.07 - Time switches with clock or watch movement or with synchronous motor. 

This heading covers devices which do not have the character of clocks of heading 91.05, but are 
mainly designed to make or break electric circuits automatically at given times, usually at times 
determined according to a previously established daily or weekly programme. To be included in 
this heading these devices must have a movement of the watch or clock type (including 
secondary or synchronous motor clock movements) or a synchronous motor with or without 
reduction gear. 

Time switches are used for the control of lighting circuits (for public places, shop windows, 
staircases, illuminated signs, etc.), heating circuits (water heaters, etc.), cooling installations, 
pumps, two-rate electricity supply meters, etc. They consist essentially of a mechanical or 
electric movement of the watch or clock type or a synchronous motor, usually a dial with or 
without hands, a time-regulating device (levers and pins), together with systems of driving 
relays, switches and commutators. The whole is enclosed in a case with terminals. The dial is 
usually marked in hours and sometimes also in days and months; levers or pins around its 
periphery actuate the contact devices at the desired times. 

• Time switches may be set in action by thermostats, pressure regulators, water level regulators, 
etc. 

The heading also includes switches for making and breaking the circuit supplying electrical 
apparatus (television receivers, irons, washing machines, billiard table lights, etc.), switching 
on when coins are inserted and switching off through the action of a synchronous motor, the 
interval being determined by the number of coins inserted. 

The heading excludes the following when presented separately : cases for the devices described above 
(classified either in heading 91.12 or in their respective headings, see the Explanatory Note to heading 
91.12), watch or clock movements (headings 91.08 to 91.10) and parts of such movements (generally 
heading 91.10 or 91.14). 

• 

• 
XVIII-9107-1 



91.08 • 
91.08 - Watch movements, complete and assembled. 

- Electrically perated : 

9108.11 - - With mec anical display only or with a device to which a mechanical 
display c be incorporated 

9108.12 - - With opto-electronic display only 

9108.19 - - Other 

9108.20 - With automatic winding 

9108.90 - Other 

This heading applies to assembled watch movements without cases, that is to say, complete and 
ready for use. These movements may be of five principal types : 

(1) mechanical movements; 

(2) electronic movements of the balance-spring type; 

(3) electronic movements with a flexural resonator (tuning fork); 

(4) quartz movements with an analogue time display (hands); 

(5) quartz movements with an electronic digital time display (light-emitting diodes (LED) or 
liquid crystal display (LCD)). 

Mechanical or electronic movements with an analogue time display may be presented without 
dial or hands. In electronic (solid state) movements with a digital time display, the display cell 
forms an integral part of the movement; without it the movement cannot function and hence 
cannot be regarded as complete and assembled within the meaning of this heading. 

Under Chapter Note 3, the e ression "watch movements" in this heading means devices 
regulated by a balance-wheel nd hairspring, quartz crystal or any other system capable of 
determining intervals of time, ith a display or a system to which a mechanical display can be 
incorporated. Such watch movements shall not exceed 12 mm in thickness and 50 mm in width, 
length or diameter. These movements are therefore mainly intended for the watches and clocks 
of headings 91.01 to 91.03, bu4 they remain classified here even if for incorporation in other 
articles of this Chapter or eve in instruments or apparatus of other Chapters (measuring or 
precision instruments, pedometers, explosive devices, etc.). 

The heading excludes movements trot conforming to the above conditions (heading 91.09 or 91.10), and 
spring-operated motors of heading 84.12. 

The movements of this heading may be unpolished, polished, nickel-plated, rhodium-plated, 
silvered, gilded, varnished, etc. 

Battery or accumulator poweres watch movements are classified in this heading, whether or not 
the battery or accumulator is pr sent. 

XVIII-9108-1 



• 91.09 

91.09 - Clock movements, complete and assembled. 

9109.10 - Electrically operated 

9109.90 - Other 

This heading covers all assembled movements of the clock type, that is to say, complete and 
ready for use; those having an analogue time display device (hands) may be with or without dial 
or hands. 

The movements of this heading are mainly intended for the goods of headings 91.04 to 91.07, 
but they remain classified here even if meant for incorporation in instruments or apparatus of 
other Chapters (measuring or precision instruments, meters, explosive devices, etc.). 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Spring-operated or weight-operated motors, etc., not fitted, nor adapted to be fitted, with 
escapements, of heading 84.12 (e.g., those for operating musical boxes). 

• (b) Watch movements as defined in Chapter Note 3 (see the Explanatory Note to heading 91.08). 

The heading therefore covers, inter alia, movements regulated by a balance-wheel and 
hairspring or by any other regulating system capable of determining intervals of time, and 
exceeding 12 mm in thickness or 50 mm in width, length or diameter; pendulum movements; 
electrical clock movements, with or without regulators (secondary clock movements, 
synchronous clock movements, etc.). 

To be classified here, synchronous and secondary clock movements must incorporate, in 
addition to the synchronous motor or the electro-magnet, a clock train, i.e., a train containing 
parts such as the first, second, third and fourth wheel, the minute wheel and hour wheel. 
Separately presented electro-magnets and synchronous motors are classified in their own 
appropriate headings, whether or not they are equipped with reduction gears regulating the 
speed of the shaft. 

These clock movements may be unpolished, polished, nickel-plated, rhodium-plated, silvered, 
gilded, varnished, etc. 

• 

• 
XVIII-9109-1 



91.10 • 
91.10 - Complete watch or clock movements, unassembled or partly assembled (movement 

sets); incomplete watch or clock movements, assembled; rough watch or clock 
movements. 

- Of watches : 

9110.11 - - Complete movements, unassembled or partly assembled (movement sets) 

9110.12 - - Incomplete movements, assembled 

9110.19 - - Rough moN ements 

9110.90 - Other 

Movement set (chablon) means a complete set of the components of a watch or clock 
movement, unassembled or partly assembled (marketed in this form). In the case of mechanical 
display movements, the dial andj hands may or may not be included. 

Incomplete mechanical watchor clock movement means a movement which is mounted but 
lacks certain parts other than the dial, hands or winding spindle (e.g., the escapement or the 
barrel bridge). 

Incomplete fully electronic w tch or clock movement means a movement which is mounted 
but lacks certain parts other th n the battery (e.g., the display, part of the electronic circuit or 
components thereof). 

Incomplete electronic watch or clock movement with mechanical display means a 
movement which is mounted bu lacks certain parts other than the dial, hands, setting spindle or 
battery (e.g., the electronic circ it or components thereof, the motor). 

Rough watch or clock movem nt means the unassembled parts of a watch or clock movement 
consisting of the plate (and an additional plates), bridges, train, motion work, winding and 
setting mechanism, and additi nal mechanisms such as automatic winding device, calendar 
mechanisms, chronograph, ala , etc., but without escapement, balance-wheel and hairspring or 
other regulating device, mainspring, dial or hands. These may be presented with or without a 
barrel. 

XVIII-9110-1 



• 91.11 

91.11 - Watch cases and parts thereof. 

9111.10 - Cases of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal 

9111.20 - Cases of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated 

9111.80 - Other cases 

9111.90 - Parts 

This heading covers : 

(A) Cases for the watches of heading 91.01 or 91.02 (pocket-watches, wrist-watches, 
chronograph watches, etc.), with or without glasses, presented without movements. 

(B) Parts of these cases, including : 

(1) The case body, i.e., the framework of the case. It may have hinges for the bottom, and 

• in pocket-watches the case bodies have also hinges for the dome and the bezel. 

(2) The pendant, welded to the case body, with the watch bow (for pocket-watches) and 
the bushings. 

(3) The dome, the inner cover protecting the movement (does not exist in ordinary 
watches). 

(4) The bezel, the part which holds the glass. The edge for holding the glass in place is 
more especially referred to as the groove. 

(5) The bottom, which closes the watch on the opposite side from the glass. Ordinary 
watches have only one, while hunters have a second similar piece (the cover) which 
protects the glass. 

Cases for wrist-watches have no pendant or watch bow proper, but have lugs for attaching the 
wrist-straps. These lugs consist of several parts, including the bar which may be fixed or 
spring-operated. Some ladies' wrist-watches have no lugs but are provided with claws for 
attaching a cord. 

Wrist-watch cases often consist of only two parts, the case body and the bottom being 
combined. Sometimes, the bottom and the bezel each bear one part of the dome, or the bezel and 
the case body are in one piece. In more highly finished types, the movement is first enclosed in 
a protective dome. 

Watch cases and parts thereof may be of any material. They are mainly made of base metal 
(steel, nickel, etc., polished, chromium-plated, silvered or gilded), or of precious metal, or of 
metal clad with precious metal, or sometimes of plastics, ivory, agate, mother-of-pearl or 
tortoise-shell. They may be ornamented (engine-turned, engraved, chased, trimmed with natural 
or cultured pearls, natural, synthetic or reconstructed precious or semi-precious stones, etc.). 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Simple protective covers for watches, nor watch glasses; these are classified in their own appropriate 
headings. 

(b) Parts of general use as defined in Note 2 to Section XV (which include springs for watch cases), of 
base metal (Section XV) and similar goods of plastics (Chapter 39). 

(c) Clock cases and cases of a similar type for other goods of this Chapter, and parts thereof 
(heading 91.12). 

• 
XVIII-9111-1 



  

91.12 • 
91.12 - Clock cases and cases of a similar type for other goods of this Chapter, and parts 

thereof. 

9112.20 - Cases 

9112.90 - Parts 

This heading covers clock case , and, provided they are of a type similar to clock cases, cases 
for other goods of this Chapter; subject to this reserve, the heading therefore includes cases for 
alarm clocks, marine chrono eters, motor vehicle clocks, time-registers, time-recorders or 
time-stamps, time interval meters (minute timers, seconds timers, etc.) or for other clocks of this 
Chapter. Such cases remain in the heading whether with or without glasses, and whether or not 
finished. But the heading excludes cases of a type not similar to normal clock cases but rather 
of the type used for scientifi apparatus, electricity supply meters, etc. (cases for timers, 
time-recorders or time switche are sometimes of this kind); such cases are classified in their 
own appropriate headings. 

The cases classified here are made in widely different forms; they are usually of metal 
(including precious metal), wood, plastics, leather, tortoise-shell, mother of pearl, marble, 
alabaster, ceramic materials, yx, agate or ivory. They may be ornamented, trimmed with 
natural or cultured pearls or natal, synthetic or reconstructed precious or semi-precious stones, 
or combined with motifs, sculptures, statuettes, figures of animals, etc. 

The heading also includes parts of clock cases, such as bezels, frames, pedestals, stands and 
feet. 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Protective covers, usually of g ss, presented separately (heading 70.20). 

(b) Parts of general use as defined in Note 2 to Section XV (which include springs for clock cases), of 
base metal (Section XV) and similar goods of plastics which are classified in Chapter 39. 

(c) Watch cases (heading 91.11). 

XVIII-9112-1 



• 91.13 

91.13 - Watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets, and parts thereof. 

9113.10 - Of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal 

9113.20 - Of base metal, whether or not gold- or silver-plated 

9113.90 - Other 

This heading covers all kinds of watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets, i.e., all devices 
for fastening watches to the wrist. 

Watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets may be of any material, for example, base metal, 
precious metal, leather, plastics or textile matenal. They may also be clearly decorative in 
character without this affecting their classification. 

The heading also includes parts of watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets, identifiable as 
such, of any material. 

• The heading excludes : 

(a) Other attaching devices (neck chains, pendant bands, watch chains, rings, brooches, etc.) which are 
classifiable in their appropriate headings. 

(b) Buckles and buckle-clasps of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal (heading 71.15) or 
of base metal (heading 83.08). 

(c) Watch straps, watch bands and watch bracelets presented with their watches but not attached thereto 
(heading 91.01 or 91.02). 

• 

• 
XVIII-9113-1 



  

91.14 

91.14 - Other clock or watc1h:1  rts. 

9114.10 - Springs, including hair-springs 

9114.30 - Dials 

9114.40 - Plates and bridges 

9114.90 - Other 

This heading covers all clock of watch parts other than : 

(a) Parts excluded by Chapter Not 1 : 

(1) Weights, clock or watch glasses, watch chains, ball bearings and bearing balls (e.g., for 
self-winding watches). 

(2) Parts of general use as lefined in Note 2 to Section XV, e.g., screws (bridge, crown, dial, 
ratchet, click, end-stone Cap or index disc, yoke, setting lever, etc.), taper pins, clock chains, 
figures for dials, of base metal (Section XV) or similar goods of plastics (Chapter 39) or of 
precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal (generally heading 71.15). 

These parts are classified in their own appropriate headings. However, clock and watch 
springs (mainsprings, hairsprings, etc.) remain in this heading. 

(b) Parts specifically included in other headings of this Chapter (e.g., the complete and assembled 
movements of heading 91.08 r 91.09, the movement sets, incomplete watch or clock movements, 
assembled or rough watch o clock movements of heading 91.10, the cases of heading 91.11 
or 91.12 and the watch straps, atch bands and watch bracelets of heading 91.13). 

Except as provided in paragr ph (a) or (b) above, parts suitable for use both in clocks or 
watches and in other articles, for example, in toys, meters or measuring or precision instruments 
(springs, trains, jewels, hands, etc.) fall in this heading (see Chapter Note 4). However, the 
heading does not cover parts which are not clearly clock or watch parts (e.g., printing or 
totalling devices for time-regi4ers, and certain other parts used in articles of heading 91.06 
or 91.07). 

The heading includes identifiable blanks of clock or watch parts, but it excludes metal pieces 
not yet recognisable as clock or watch parts (e.g., plates, bridges, etc., direct from the lathe or 
roughly cut to shape, without drilling, hollowing, etc.). These are classified according to their 
constituent material. 

The clock or watch parts o this heading may be unpolished, polished, nickel-plated, 
rhodium-plated, silvered, gilded varnished, etc., or jewelled. 

Subject to the above provisions the principal clock or watch parts classified here are : 

(A) PARTS OF WATCH MOVEMENTS 
(regardless of complexity of system) 

These include : 

(1) Frame : plate (and any aclitional plates), bridges (of the barrel, centre wheel, third wheel, 
fourth wheel, balance-whe I (cock), escapement, setting wheel, etc.). 

(2) Driving mechanism : maiospring, barrel, barrel cover, barrel arbor and ratchet, click, click 
spring. 

XVIII-9114-1 



• 91.14 

Train : centre wheel and pinion, third wheel and pinion, fourth wheel and pinion. 

Motion work : cannon pinion, minute wheel pinion and minute wheel, hour wheel. 

Escapement (anchor or lever, pin pallet, cylinder, detent, etc.) : escape wheel and pinions, 
lever, pallet staff, rollers, pallet stones, impulse pin, cylinder. 

Regulating device : balance, balance staff, hairspring (flat, Bre et, cylindrical), 
tuning-fork, stud, collet, regulator, index stud, end-stone cap or index disc, regulator 
spring, lower cap jewel end-piece, including special parts for shock-proof devices. 

Winding and setting mechanism : crown, winding stem and pinion, clutch wheel, setting 
wheels, crown ratchet wheel, crown wheel core, yoke (rocking bar), setting lever, setting 
lever spring and yoke springs. 

Parts of electronic movements : circuits for watches comprising, for example, an 
insulating base carryingprinted connections and other discrete components formed 
otherwise than by printing(for example, coils, capacitors, resistors, diodes and transistors), 

• possibly together with an integrated circuit. 

Platform escapements consist of the plate, bridges, escapement, balance-wheel and 
hairspring, and the regulator of a clock or watch movement, with or without train. They 
remain classified here whether assembled with the escapement regulated, or unassembled. 

Assembled platform escapements may be intended for incorporation in a whole range of 
appliances using clock or watch movements (time-registers, time switches, etc.), and 
sometimes also in small clocks or alarm clocks. 

(B) PARTS OF CLOCK OR ALARM CLOCK MOVEMENTS 

Many of the parts of these movements are similar in principle to parts of watch movements but 
are larger. 

Parts peculiar to clock movements include weight drums, pendulums, including compensated 
pendulums (mercury, invar stem, etc.), crutches, verges, verge wheels, recoil escapements, 
dead-beat (or Graham) escapements, etc., independent winding keys. Parts of alarm clock 
movements include fixed winding keys and knobs for setting. 

• (C) STRIKING WORK PARTS 

(1) Striking work of alarm clocks : stop or detent, notched collar, release wheel, escape 
wheel, index staff, pallet, striking hammer, etc. 

(2) Clock striking work (locking plate type, rack type, etc.) : drum or barrel and barrel wheel, 
locking plate, great wheel, pin wheel, third wheel, warning wheel, fly, detents, levers or fly 
springs, repeater rack, snail, hammer, lifting piece, arbor, fly wheel, gathering pallet, rack, 
ball, gong, chimes. 

(D) JEWELS 

This category includes only worked stones (jewels), i.e., those which have been turned, cut, 
polished, drilled, hollowed, etc., or mounted (in a setting or a screw). Unworked or roughly 
sawnjewels are excluded (Chapter 71). Watchmakers' jewels are usually extremely small, 
their diameter and thickness rarely exceeding 2 mm and 0.5 mm, respectively. 

• 
XVIII-9114-2 



   

  

91.14 • 
The principal stones used in cl Eck- or watch-making are natural or synthetic rubies, sapphires 
and garnets, and occasionally d amonds. In cheap articles, glass is sometimes used, or the jewels 
are replaced by metal caps. 

Clock or watch jewels bear th names of parts which they support, e.g., centre wheel jewels, 
third wheeljewels, fourth heel jewels, escape wheel jewels, pallet staff jewels and 
balance-wheel jewels. The be ring of a cylindrical pivot consists of a drilled jewel or of a 
drilled jewel and a solid jewel end-stone). There are also bearings consisting of conical cavity 
jewels. 

In addition to round jewels u ed as bearings, clocks and watches with a lever escapement 
usually also contain three spec ial jewels : two pallet stones (bevelled jewels attached to each 
end of the pallet) and an imp use pin (a jewel, usually of semi-round or triangular section, 
intended for the roller). 

The jewelling process may be arried out by hand setting, by using a mounted jewel, or, more 
usually, by pressing. 

(E) DIALS 

Dials generally bear divisions r figures indicating the hours, minutes and seconds. They may 
be flat or curved. They are us ally of silvered, gilded, painted, oxidised or otherwise coated 
brass, of enamelled copper, of 'gold or silver, or sometimes of paper, glass, plastics or pottery. 
The figures and inscriptions are produced by various methods (transfer, painting, stamping, 
etc.). Dials may have luminous figures or symbols. 

Dials are fixed to the plate (or to an additional plate, called "dial plate") by screws, pins or an 
outer ring of metal. 

(F) HANDS 

These indicate hours, minutes and seconds. The heading also covers special hands for 
chronograph watches and han s for alarm clocks, etc. Watch or clock hands may be flat or 
curved, and may be made of steel, brass or copper, generally polished, oxidised, nickel-plated, 
chromium-plated, silvered, gil ed or lacquered; they are sometimes of gold and even of bone. 
Luminous hands have "win ows" filled with a compound based on radioactive salts 
(radio-thorium, meso-thorium, tc.). There are innumerable types of hands, designed to suit the 
type of dial. 

XVIII-9 1 14-3 



• 92 

Chapter 92 

Musical instruments; 
parts and accessories of such articles 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Parts of general use, as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV), or similar 
goods of plastics (Chapter 39); 

(b) Microphones, amplifiers, loud-speakers, head-phones, switches, stroboscopes or other accessory 
instruments, apparatus or equipment of Chapter 85 or 90, for use with but not incorporated in or 
housed in the same cabinet as instruments of this Chapter; 

• (c) Toy instruments or apparatus (heading 95.03); 

(d) Brushes for cleaning musical instruments (heading 96.03), or monopods, bipods, tripods and 
similar articles (heading 96.20); or 

(e) Collectors' pieces or antiques (heading 97.05 or 97.06). 

2.- Bows and sticks and similar devices used in playing the musical instruments of heading 92.02 
or 92.06 presented with such instruments in numbers normal thereto and clearly intended for use 
therewith, are to be classified in the same heading as the relative instruments. 

Cards, discs and rolls of heading 92.09 presented with an instrument are to be treated as separate 
articles and not as forming a part of such instrument. 

GENERAL 

This Chapter covers : 

(A) Musical instruments (headings 92.01 to 92.08). 

(B) Parts and accessories of these instruments (heading 92.09). 

Some musical instruments (pianos, guitars, etc.) may have an electrical sound pick-up and 
amplifying device; they nevertheless remain classified in their respective headings in this 
Chapter, provided that, without the electrical equipment, they can still be used like the similar 
conventional-type instruments. The electrical equipment itself, unless forming an integral part 
of the instrument or housed in the same cabinet as the instrument, is however in all cases 
excluded (heading 85.18). 

Electrical or electronic instruments (other than the automatic pianos of heading 92.01) which are 
not suitable for playing without the electrical or electronic equipment fall in heading 92.07 (see 
the corresponding Explanatory Note). The latter heading therefore covers, for example, 
electrostatic, electronic or similar guitars, organs, pianos, accordions, carillons. 

The instruments and apparatus of this Chapter may be of any material, including precious metal 
or metal clad with precious metal, and may incorporate precious or semi-precious stones 
(natural, synthetic or reconstructed). 

• 
XVIII-92-1 



92 • 
In accordance with Note 2 to t is Chapter, bows and plectra used in playing the string musical 
instruments of heading 92.02 and sticks (including soft-headed sticks) and mallets for 
percussion musical instrument of heading 92.06, when presented with those instruments in 
numbers normal thereto and c early intended for use therewith, are to be classified with the 
relative instruments and not in ea ding 92.09. However, cards, discs and rolls of heading 92.09 
presented with an instrument are to be treated as separate articles and not as forming a part of 
such instrument. 

In addition to the exclusions specifically mentioned in the Explanatory Notes below, this Chapter also 
excludes : 

(a) Electronic musical modules ( tiel  ading 85.43). 

(b) Musical instruments which ca be clearly recognised as toys because of the character of the material 
used, their rougher finish, the lack of musical qualities or by any other characteristics (Chapter 95). 
Examples include certain mouth organs, violins, accordions, trumpets, drums, musical boxes. 

(c) Collectors' pieces (heading 97.05) (e.g., instruments having an historical or ethnographical interest), 
or antiques of an age exceedin 100 years (heading 97.06). 

XVLII-92-2 



• 92.01 

92.01 - Pianos, including automatic pianos; harpsichords and other keyboard stringed 
instruments (+). 

9201.10 - Upright pianos 

9201.20 - Grand pianos 

9201.90 - Other 

This heading covers : 

(1) Pianos, with a keyboard and strings struck by hammers, whether or not fitted with an 
electrical sound pick-up and amplifying device, i.e. : 

(a) Upright pianos, which have a sound-board on which the strings are mounted 
vertically, and when overstrung, with the bass strings crossing the remainder; 

• (b) Grand pianos (concert and baby grands), which have strings mounted horizontally in 
an elongated casing. 

This group includes automatic pianos, whether or not incorporating a keyboard, which are 
played, e.g., by means of perforated rolls of paper or paperboard; they may be 
mechanically, pneumatically or electrically operated. 

However, "electronic pianos" and electronic musical instruments which may be fitted to pianos in 
order to produce the sound effects of other instruments while the piano is being played fall in 
heading 92.07 (see the General Explanatory Note to this Chapter). 

(2) Harpsichords and other keyboard stringed instruments such as spinets and 
clavichords. 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheadings 9201.10 and 9201.20 

These subheadings also include automatic pianos. 

• 

• 
XVIH-9201-1 



92.02 • 
92.02 - Other string musical i struments (for example, guitars, violins, harps). 

9202.10 - Played with a bow 

9202.90 - Other 

This heading covers : 

(A) Instruments played with a bow 

The chief examples of such instruments are violins, viols and violas (the latter being 
slightly larger than ordinary violins), violoncellos and bass-viols and double basses. 

(B) Other string musical ins ruments 

This group includes : 

(1) Plucked string instr i ments, in which sound vibrations are obtained by momentarily 
displacing the string ut of alignment, either with the fingers or with a small pointed 
piece (plectrum) of w od, ivory, tortoise-shell, plastics, etc. Examples include : 

(a)  Mandolines (Neapolitan mandolines with a deeply cambered back, flat 
mandolines, mandolas, etc.). 

(b)  Guitars. 

(c)  German lutes (a kind of mandoline). 

(d)  Banjos (a long- ecked instrument having a circular flat-backed body with a flat 
belly formed by drumskin). 

(e)  Ukuleles (small guitars with a thick neck). 

(f)  Zithers (or citl4rs). These have a flat sound-box of approximately trapezoidal 
shape, and a large number of strings usually of metal. 

(g) Balalaikas. 

(h)  Harps. These are stringed instruments plucked with the fingers; they have a 
triangular frame and strings of graduated lengths. 

(2) Other instruments, siach as : 

(a) Aeolian harps. These are used in gardens, etc. They consist of a number of 
strings mounted on a sounding box; when placed in a current of wind they 
produce natural harmonics. 

(b) Czimbalos. Thee have a frame on which steel strings are mounted. They are 
played by strikin with softheaded hammers, and are used in gipsy orchestras. 

In some instruments, particularly guitars, the sound may be electronically amplified without 
excluding them from this he mg; however, electronic instruments such as guitars without 
sound-boxes fall in heading 92.07 (see the General Explanatory Note to this Chapter). 



• 92.03 

[92.03] 

XVW-9203-1 



92.04 

[92.04] 

XVLII-9204-1 



• 92.05 

92.05 Wind musical instruments (for example, keyboard pipe organs, accordions, 
clarinets, trumpets, bagpipes), other than fairground organs and mechanical street 
organs. 

9205.10 - Brass-wind instruments 

9205.90 - Other 

This heading covers wind musical instruments not specified in heading 92.08 (fairground 
organs, mechanical street organs, sound signalling instruments, etc.) though these could, in 
certain respects, also be considered wind instruments. 

The heading includes : 

(A) Brass-wind instruments. 

The term "brass-wind" refers to the tone quality of instruments used in a particular section 
of an orchestra, rather than to the constituent material of the instruments. This group 

• includes instruments, generally of metal (brass, nickel-silver, silver, etc.) in the form of a 
tapered tube terminating in a bell; they may be coiled to various degrees. They are fitted 
with a hollowed-out mouthpiece, sounded with the lips and usually valve operated. They 
include cornets, trumpets (simple trumpets, orchestral trumpets, etc.), bugles, saxhorns, 
baritone and bass bugles, bombardons (bass-tuba), bass sousaphones, trombones (valve or 
sliding type), orchestral horns (e.g., French horns) and non-valved horns used in orchestras 
(e.g., hunting horns). 

(B) Other wind musical instruments. 

This group covers : 

(1) Keyboard pipe organs (church-organ type). These are wind instruments in which the 
movement of the keys is transmitted to the pipes electrically, electro-pneumatically or 
mechanically. 

The heading also covers the console and the organ case (i.e., the woodwork in which 
the organ is contained and which is usually of decorative design) when presented with 
the organ. If presented separately, they are excluded (heading 92.09). 

This heading does not include orchestrions, street organs and similar pipe instruments, not 
fitted with a keyboard but operated either automatically or by a handle (heading 92.08). 
Electronic organs are classified in heading 92.07. 

(2) Harmoniums and similar keyboard instruments with free metal reeds, but without 
pipes. 

(3) Accordions and similar instruments, concertinas, bandoneons and foot-blown 
accordions. 
The heading excludes electronic accordions (see the Explanatory Note to heading 92.07, and 
the General Explanatory Note to this Chapter). 

(4) Mouth organs (harmonicas). 

(5) So-called "wood-wind" instruments. These instruments consist essentially of a tube 
(of wood or reed, metal, plastics, ebonite, glass) with holes generally fitted with keys 
and rings. They are usually sounded with reeds. This group includes flutes, recorders, 
fifes, flageolets, oboes, clarinets, cors anglais, bassoons, saxophones and 
sarrusophones. 

XVIII-9205-1 



92.05 • 
The group also covers ocarinas (small egg-shaped instruments made of metal or clay, 
giving a flute-like sound), and sliding whistles (of metal or ebonite). 

(6) Other wind instruments (e.g., bagpipes, Breton pipes or the musette, consisting of a 
wind-chest or bag made of skin or from a bladder, and three to five pipes - one pipe 
being the chanter and be others the drones). 

XVIII-9205-2 



• 92.06 

92.06 - Percussion musical instruments (for example, drums, xylophones, cymbals, 
castanets, maracas). 

Percussion musical instruments are struck with an object of a similar kind, or with a stick or 
similar device, or with the bare hand. These instruments are also known collectively as "the 
drums". 

The main instruments in this heading are : 

(A) Those with a stretched skin, e.g. : 

(1) Tabors and tambourins. 

(2) Drums (shallow side drums, bass or big drums, etc.). These consist of a wooden or 
metal cylinder with parchment or vellum stretched over each end (double-headed 
drums). They are sounded by striking with one or two plain or leather-headed sticks. 

(3) Timpani and kettle-drums. These consist of parchment stretched over hollow copper 
hemispheres (varying considerably in size and usually resting on the ground). They are 
tuned to a definite note and are sounded with sticks. 

(4) Tambourines with jingles. These consist of a hoop covered with skin and are fitted 
with jingles or copper tongues which are sounded by shaking the instrument in 
different ways, or by striking it with the palm of the hand, the fingertips, etc. 

(5) Tom-toms. 

(B) Other percussion instruments such as : 

(1) Cymbals. These are circular plates generally sounded by striking one against the other 
or by rubbing them together; in some cases, one single cymbal may be sounded by 
striking with a soft-headed stick. 

(2) Gongs (e.g., Chinese gongs), which are metal plates usually struck with a heavy stick 
tipped with a skin or felt wad. 

(3) Triangles, which are steel rods bent into the form of equilateral triangles; they are 
sounded with an iron rod. 

(4) Jingles johnnies (Chinese pavilions, Turkish crescents), which are fitted with jingles 
and small bells which sound on shaking the staff on which the instrument is mounted. 

(5) Castenets, which are small wooden, bone or ivory concave or shell-shaped 
instruments; they are either fixed to the fingers or mounted on a handle, and are 
sounded by striking one against the other. 

(6) Xylophones consisting of a series of small wooden slats of graduated lengths, mounted 
on two supports and played by striking with sticks. 

(7) Metallophones, which are similar to xylophones but have narrow metal plates (steel or 
duralumin) instead of wooden slats; (both xylophones and metallophones are often 
fitted with metal resonance tongues or tubes beneath the table). The heading also 
includes similar instruments with glass plates. 

XVIII-9206-1 



92.06 • 
(8) Celestas and the like, used in the percussion instruments group as a substitute for 

conventional chimes. These have the outward appearance of a small piano with pedal 
and dampers. Sound is produced by striking special thick steel plates with mechanical 
hammers operated bykeyboard. 

(9) Bells, sets of bells, climes and tubular bells (a series of tubes suspended in a frame 
and struck either with a bare hand or with a hammer). 

(10) Maracas and similar instruments consisting of hollow bells or tubes sounded by 
shaking. 

(11) "Claves" consisting of a pair of hard wooden sticks. 
I 

(12) Flexatones consisting of a metal plate mounted on a handle, and two wooden balls 
placed on either side of the plate. On shaking the instrument, the balls hit the plate 
causing it to vibrate, while the tone is controlled by bending the plate with the thumb. 

Some of the instruments mentioned above are occasionally combined so that a single performer 
may play several at the same time. In dance-bands, for instance, the soft-headed stick used to 
sound the big drum is pedal-operated and, in addition, the drum is fitted with cymbals, gongs, 
wood-blocks (types of wooden resonance boxes either equipped with bells or forming a 
xylophone), etc. 

I 
Carillons for public buildings, suitable for producing music, are also classified here. 

However, electronic percussion musical instruments are classified in heading 92.07. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Door or table bells and gongs, door chimes, etc., which are not musical instruments (heading 83.06 
or 85.31). 

(b) Chimes and other striking meichanisms for clocks (heading 91.14). 

XVLII-9206-2 



92.07 

92.07 - Musical instruments, the sound of which is produced, or must be amplified, 
electrically (for example, organs, guitars, accordions). 

9207.10 - Keyboard instruments, other than accordions 

9207.90 - Other 

This heading covers musical instruments in which the sound is generated or amplified 
electrically (including electronically) (i.e., those which cannot be played for normal hearing 
without their electrical or electronic components, even though the vibrating devices with which 
they are fitted may produce faint sounds). In this respect, they differ from certain other 
instruments (e.g., pianos, accordions, guitars) which, while they may be equipped with an 
electrical sound pick-up and amplifying device, are nevertheless independent instruments 
suitable for playing without such devices, in the same way as similar conventional-type 
instruments. Electrically operated automatic pianos are excluded (heading 92.01). 

The instruments of this heading are usually based on the use of : 

(A) Electro-magnetic generators. 

In one of the systems based on this principle, the generator has a drive shaft connected by a 
flexible coupling to a synchronous motor which drives it at constant speed. Different sized 
gear wheels are placed in pairs along the shaft, each wheel driving toothed wheels known 
as "tone" wheels. When the instrument is connected to the mains, the synchronous motor 
turns the tone wheels at speeds which vary according to the diameter of the gear wheels. A 
permanent magnet carrying a coil at one end is fitted near each tone wheel and parallel to 
it. When the wheels rotate, the teeth placed at regular intervals around their edges under 
the pole of the associated magnets; this causes variations in the fields which in turn set up 
weak current changes in the coils. These currents, which are of predetermined frequencies, 
are electrically amplified and transmitted to loudspeakers. 

This principle is used in particular for the "organ" type of instrument. 

In another system, a harmonium-type "free-reed" moves across a pole of a permanent 
magnet, its vibrations producing variations in the magnetic field set up in a coil wound 
around the magnet. The resulting current is electrically amplified and transmitted to a 
loudspeaker. 

(B) Electrostatic generators, of which there are several types : 

(1) Stretched wire generators. In these the vibrations produced when a wire carrying an 
electric current is struck by a hammer, give rise to variations in capacitance between 
the wire and metal parts (studs) adjacent to it. The variations in capacitance correspond 
exactly to the vibrations of the string, so that they provide faithful reproduction when 
amplified. 

(2) Vibrating reed generators, in which the current is carried by reeds instead of strings. 

(3) Variable-condenser generators, in which the condensers (capacitors) are rotated at 
constant speed by a motor. 

(C) Oscillating electronic valve (or tube) generators, including gas discharge tube 
oscillators. 

XVIII-9207-1 



92.07 • 
(D) Photoelectric generator , in which a light ray passing through a perforated disc is thrown 

on a cell. By carefull calculating the number of apertures in the discscreen, a 
corresponding number o current variations is obtained and these, amplified, produce the 
desired sound. 

Some of these instruments ar called electro-magnetic, electrostatic, electronic, radio-electric, 
photoelectric pianos, organs, accordions, carillons, etc., but are nearly always known by their 
registered trade names. They nable faithful sound reproduction of most musical instruments to 
be obtained by simply changi g registers. Such instruments may be described as "monophone" 
when they only give a succes ion of separate notes, or "polyphone" when they produce several 
notes at once (e.g., "organs"). 

Some may be played separately; others may be adapted to an ordinary piano, the instrument 
being played with the right hand while the piano accompaniment is played with the left hand. 
Such instruments are classified here, whether or not presented with the piano. 

Although they may generally be essential for the normal operation of the instruments of this 
heading, electrical or electro is apparatus (in particular the amplifier and loudspeaker) are 
excluded and fall in their resp ctive headings (Chapter 85) whenever they are not built into the 
unit itself. When, however, hey are incorporated in or housed in the same cabinet as the 
instrument they are classified with the instrument, even though they may be packed separately 
for convenience of transport. 

This heading does not cover con entional type clocks (with dials showing the hours) which are used with 
certain electronic chimes to strik automatically the hours, half-hours, etc. (Chapter 91). 



• 92.08 

92.08 Musical boxes, fairground organs, mechanical street organs, mechanical singing 
birds, musical saws and other musical instruments not falling within any other 
heading of this Chapter; decoy calls of all kinds; whistles, call horns and other 
mouth-blown sound signalling instruments. 

9208.10 - Musical boxes 

9208.90 - Other 

(A) MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS NOT FALLING IN ANY OTHER 
HEADING OF THIS CHAPTER 

These include : 

(1) Musical boxes. These consist of small mechanical movements playing tunes 
automatically, incorporated into boxes or various other containers. The main component is 
a cylinder set with pins (according to the notes of the tune to be played); on rotating, the 
pins contact metal tongues arranged like the teeth of a comb, causing them to vibrate and 
produce the notes. The components are mounted on a plate and the cylinder is rotated 
either by a spring-operated (clockwork) motor which is wound with a key or directly by a 
handle. In some types, the cylinder may be replaced by a sheet-metal disc made on the hill 
and dale principle. 

Articles which incorporate a musical mechanism but which are essentially utilitarian or ornamental 
in function (for example, clocks, miniature wooden furniture, glass vases containing artificial 
flowers, ceramic figurines) are not regarded as musical boxes within the meaning of this heading. 
These articles are classified in the same headings as the corresponding articles not incorporating a 
musical mechanism. 

Also, articles such as wrist watches, cups and greeting cards containing electronic musical modules 
are not regarded as goods of this heading. Such articles are classified in the same headings as the 
corresponding articles not incorporating such modules. 

(2) Fairground organs, e.g., orchestrions and similar instruments. Some fairgrounds organs 
are large instruments fitted with two dummy keyboards, one of which plays on metal 
strings by means of piano key-action, while the other controls organ pipes; in addition, 
there are catgut strings played by mechanical bows. These instruments may incorporate 
drums, cymbals, accordions, etc., thereby giving orchestra-like effects. They are mainly 
used in amusement parks or fairgrounds, etc. They may be hand or power operated, and are 
played from perforated rolls or cards. 

(3) Mechanical street organs. These consist of a case containing a barrel (or cylinder) set 
with copper pins which, when turned by a handle, operate valves on wood or metal pipes. 

(4) Mechanical singing birds. These are small automatons usually enclosed in a cage. A 
spring-operated (clockwork) motor in the base of the cage actuates a set of pistons and 
bellows thereby producing a modulated note and causing the head and body of the 
imitation bird to move. 

(5) Musical saws. These have a special steel blade which is caused to vibrate either with a 
bow or a felt-headed hammer. 

(6) Other fancy instruments such as rattles and mouth-operated sirens. 

XVIII-9208-1 



92.08 • 
Cards, discs and rolls, whether r not presented with instruments of this heading (see Note 2 to this 
Chapter), are always classified in eading 92.09. 

(B) DECOY CALLS OF ALL KINDS AND MOUTH-BLOWN 
SOUND SIGNALLING INSTRUMENTS 

(1) Decoy calls and effects, etc., are small mouth-blown or hand-operated instruments which 
imitate bird or animal calls in order to attract game. 

(2) Mouth-blown sound sigalling instruments such as : 

(i) Horns and call horns, made of horn, bone, metal, etc. 

(ii) Whistles (mouth-blown) of metal, wood, etc., for giving signals, etc. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Door bells, table bells, bicycle bells, etc. (heading 83.06 or 85.31). 

(b) Bulb-operated horns and N.varning horns (e.g., for vehicles), ships' sirens, portable or fixed 
hand-operated roof sirens; these are classified according to the constituent material, or in 
Section XVI or XVII, as the case may be. 

(c) Electrically operated sound .ignalling equipment or apparatus (heading 85.12 or 85.31, as the case 
may be). 

XVIII-9208-2 



• 92.09 

92.09 - Parts (for example, mechanisms for musical boxes) and accessories (for example, 
cards, discs and rolls for mechanical instruments) of musical instruments; 
metronomes, tuning forks and pitch pipes of all kinds. 

9209.30 - Musical instrument strings 

- Other : 

9209.91 - - Parts and accessories for pianos 

9209.92 - - Parts and accessories for the musical instruments of heading 92.02 

9209.94 - - Parts and accessories for the musical instruments of heading 92.07 

9209.99 - - Other 

This heading covers : 

(A) Metronomes, tuning forks and pitch pipes. 
This group covers metronomes, tuning forks and pitch pipes whether intended for musical 
or other uses. 

Metronomes are small mechanical devices used to indicate the exact tempo in which a 
piece of music is to be played; they are generally contained in a pyramid shaped box and 
may be fitted with a bell. The main part is a beating rod pivoted at its lower end; the 
movement of the rod may be accelerated or retarded according to a scale located behind 
the bar. 

The group also includes metronomes used for industrial purposes; these are fitted with 
electrical contacts. 

Tuning forks are usually small U-shaped metal bars which, when vibrated, emit one given 
note; the group also covers large concert-hall tuning forks consisting of a metal tongue 
mounted on a sounding box and struck with a hammer. 

Pitch pipes (tuning pipes) are mouth-blown and consist of one or more reeds or pipes; 
these generally emit several notes (4 or 6). 

The group also includes tuning forks used in medicine (in particular for hearing tests, in 
which case they are preset to emit a wide range of vibrations and are often put up in cases 
containing several instruments), for stroboscopic observations. Some are fitted with 
electrical devices for maintaining the vibrations. 

(B) Mechanisms for musical boxes. 
See the Explanatory Note to heading 92.08. 

(C) Musical instrument strings. 

This group covers strings for true string instruments (pianos, harps, violins, 
violoncellos, mandolines, etc.). These are usually made of : 

(1) Catgut (generally from the intestines of sheep). Catgut strings are made up of a certain 
number of strands according to the thickness required; each strand consists either of a 
ribbon of gut cut lengthwise or a complete gut. 

XVIII-9209-1 



92.09 • 
(2) Silk. Silk strings, usually made up of 140 strands of silk, have the external appearance 

of catgut strings. They are coated with a thin layer of gum arabic and polished with 
white wax. 

(3) Monofilament of ma -made fibre materials (usually nylon). 

(4) Wire of steel (usuall stainless), aluminium, silver, copper, etc. Metal strings are either 
single-strand, or ma e up of a metal core covered with metal wire (wound round the 
core). Strings of this ind are known as "metal-wound". 

(5) Gut, silk or nylon covered with metal wire (aluminium or other base metal, whether or 
not silver-plated, silver, etc.). The metal wire is wound round the core and strings of 
this kind are known as gut, silk- or nylon-wound. 

Musical instrument strings are recognisable by their finish. (Steel strings are made of 
polished metal and their diameter is carefully calibrated. Gut strings are completely 
uniform and the diameter is constant; some gut strings are white and translucent, others, 
however, such as strings for harps, are occasionally dyed red or blue, etc.) Strings may also 
be recognisable by the way in which they are put up (small paper bags, envelopes and the 
like, often printed with instructions for use). In addition, some strings (particularly metal 
strings) have loops or small metal balls enabling them to be fitted to the instrument 
concerned. 

The heading does not cover wire, gut and monofilament of synthetic textile materials (whether or 
not cut to length), not identifiable as musical instrument strings (classified in their own 
appropriate headings). 

(D) Other parts and accessories. 

This group covers parts and accessories of musical instruments (other than those referred 
to in (B) and (C) above, but not loudspeakers and audio-frequency amplifiers 
(heading 85.18) nor, generally speaking, electrical apparatus (motors, photoelectric cells, 
etc.), not fitted with parts or accessories of musical instruments. 

This group includes : 

(1) Parts of pianos, organs, harmoniums or similar instruments, such as : 

Complete keyboards (i.e., a complete set of keys mounted on a frame); piano 
mechanisms (i.e., 1(6,-actions with associated hammers including sound-dampers); 
cases for pianos or harmoniums; sound-boards; wooden or cast-iron frames; pedal 
mechanisms and pedals; wrest pins; metal tongues (or reeds) for harmoniums; separate 
keys for keyboards; hammers, dampers, shafts and forks for hammers, etc.; organ 
pipes, wind-chests, bellows and other component parts (including cases) of organs. 

Keys, stops, bellows and keyboards for accordions are also classified here. 

However, the heading excludes the small strips of ivory, bone or plastics, simply cut to 
rectangular shape but requiring polishing, rounding of corners or further working before use as 
coverings for keys of musical instruments; these strips are classified in their own appropriate 
headings (heading 96. 1 or Chapter 39). 

XVIII-9209-2 



• 92.09 

(2) Parts and accessories of instruments falling in heading 92.02 (string musical 
instruments), such as : 

Bodies of mandolines, guitars or similar instruments; guitar or mandoline 
"mechanisms" (i.e., the pegs and worm and tooth wheels located at the scroll-end of 
the neck so that the strings can be properly tensioned); parts of violins, violoncellos or 
the like, e.g., backs, bellies, necks (whether or not in the rough), fingerboards, nuts, 
bridges, tailpieces (on which the strings are mounted) and buttons therefor, ribs 
(between belly and back), pegs (kind of keys fitted to the scroll for varying the tension 
of the strings), string adjusters, etc., standards for violoncellos and double basses (for 
resting the instruments on the ground); bows and parts of bows (sticks, heels, tension 
screws, etc.) including horsehair in bundles for bows; plectra, mutes, chin-rests. 

(3) Parts and accessories for the instruments of heading 92.07, such as : 

Chests (for electronic pianos, organs and carillons), pedal mechanisms and pedals, 
keyboards, tone wheels (for organs, in particular). 

• See the Explanatory Note to heading 92.07 regarding electronic parts and accessories. 

(4) Parts and accessories for so-called "wood-wind" instruments of heading 92.05, 
such as : 

Turned component parts of wood for so-called "wood-wind" instruments (clarinets, 
flutes and the like); metal bodies of instruments; slides; extensions; mouthpieces of 
various types and mouthpiece covers; reeds; valves, valve control buttons; keys, rings, 
ferrules, bells, mutes; key pads (for flutes, clarinets, etc.). 

(5)  Parts and accessories for percussion instruments, such as : 

Sticks, whether or not soft-headed; mallets of various types; drum brushes; pedals used 
in dance-bands; cymbal brackets; drum-barrels and braces, etc.; slats or plates, tables 
and supporting frames for xylophones or similar instruments; skins for drums or the 
like, cut to circular or approximately circular shape and clearly identifiable; strings 
(usually of true hemp, jute or sisal) intended for stretching the skins of certain 
instruments such as drums; and the catgut or metal strings (snares) which cross the 
snare-heads of side-drums, when identifiable as such. 

The heading also covers : 

410	( 1 ) Music holders for fixing to instruments. Stands (other than monopods, bipods, tripods 
and similar articles, of heading 96.20) for holding an instrument (e.g. side-drums or 
saxophones). 

(2) Mechanical devices for playing a musical instrument. These are auxiliary devices 
enabling keyboard instruments to be played mechanically with cards, discs or rolls; they 
may be operated by handles, pedals or by bellows, or may be mechanically or electrically 
driven. They may be fitted inside or outside the instrument (pianos. or harmoniums 
usually). 

• 
XVUI-9209-3 



 

 

  

   

92.09 • 
(3) Cards, discs and rolls, for automatic musical instruments; these articles are classified here 

whether or not presented together with the instruments for which they are intended 
(see Note 2 to this Chapter). 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Articles of general use as d fined in Note 2 to Section XV, such as hinges, handles, fittings (e.g., for 
pianos), of base metal (Secti n XV), and similar goods of plastics (Chapter 39). 

(b) Tuning tools (heading 82.0 ). 
(c) Spring-operated (clockwork motors, not fitted with other parts, for musical boxes or mechanical 

singing birds (heading 84.1 )• 
(d) Watch or clock movements of fitted with parts or accessories of musical instruments (headings 91.08 

to 91.10). 

(e) Piano stools (heading 94.0 , music-stands or desks constructed for placing on the floor or ground 
(heading 94.03) and candle rackets for pianos (heading 94.05). 

(f) Rosin for bow-strings, in md ulded shapes (heading 96.02). 

(g) Cleaning brushes for flutes, boes, etc. (heading 96.03). 

XVILI-9209-4 



• XIX 

Section XIX 

ARMS AND AMMUNITION; PARTS AND ACCESSORIES THEREOF 

XIX-1 



• 

• 

• 

• 



• 93 

Chapter 93 

Arms and ammunition; Parts and accessories thereof 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Goods of Chapter 36 (for example, percussion caps, detonators, signalling flares); 

(b) Parts of general use, as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV), or similar 
goods of plastics (Chapter 39); 

(c) Armoured fighting vehicles (heading 87.10); 

(d) Telescopic sights and other optical devices suitable for use with arms, unless mounted on a 

• firearm or presented with the firearm on which they are designed to be mounted (Chapter 90); 

(e) Bows, arrows, fencing foils or toys (Chapter 95); or 

(f) Collectors' pieces or antiques (heading 97.05 or 97.06). 

2.- In heading 93.06, the reference to "parts thereof' does not include radio or radar apparatus of heading 
85.26. 

GENERAL 

This Chapter covers : 

(1) Arms of all descriptions designed for ground, sea or air warfare, for use by military armed 
forces or by the police or other organised services (customs, frontier guards, etc.). 

(2) Arms for use by private persons for defence, hunting, target shooting (e.g., in miniature 
ranges, shooting galleries or fairground stands), etc. 

(3)  Other devices which operate by the firing of an explosive charge (e.g., line-throwing guns 
and Very pistols). 

(4) Ammunition and missiles (other than articles of Chapter 36). 

• Subject to a few exceptions (see the Explanatory Notes to headings 93.05 and 93.06), the 
Chapter also includes parts and accessories of arms and parts of ammunition. 

Telescopic sights and other optical devices suitable for use with arms and mounted thereon, or 
presented with the firearms on which they are designed to be mounted, are classified with the 
arm. Otherwise presented, such optical devices are excluded (Chapter 90). 

Vehicles are excluded from this Chapter even if they are designed solely for military use, and 
whether or not they are fitted with weapons. The Chapter therefore excludes, for example, 
armoured railway vehicles (Chapter 86), tanks and armoured cars (heading 87.10), military 
aircraft (heading 88.01 or 88.02), and warships (heading 89.06). However, separately presented 
arms for these vehicles, etc. (guns, machine-guns, etc.), fall in this Chapter (see the Explanatory 
Note to heading 93.01 with regard to certain arms mounted on railway or road vehicles). 

• 
XIX-93-1 



1 

93 • 
The following are also excluded from this Chapter : 

(a) Steel helmets and other mili ary headgear (Chapter 65). 

(b) Personal protective armo , e.g., cuirasses, coats of mail, bullet-proof jackets, etc. (classified 
according to their constitue r materials). 

(c) Cross-bows, bows and arroWs for archery, and arms having the character of toys (Chapter 95). 

(d) Collectors' pieces and anticlines (heading 97.05 or 97.06). 

The arms and parts thereof of this Chapter may contain precious metal, metal clad with precious 
metal, natural or cultured pearls, precious and semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or 
reconstructed), tortoise-shell, other-of-pearl, ivory and similar materials. 

• 

• 

e 
XIX-93-2 



• 93.01 

93.01 - Military weapons, other than revolvers, pistols and the arms of heading 93.07. 

9301.10 - Artillery weapons (for example, guns, howitzers and mortars) 

9301.20 - Rocket launchers; flame-throwers; grenade launchers; torpedo tubes and 
similar projectors 

9301.90 - Other 

This heading covers all military weapons other than the revolvers and pistols of heading 93.02 
and the arms of heading 93.07. The heading includes separately presented weapons and 
firearms designed to form part of the armament of vessels, armoured trains, aircraft, tanks or 
armoured cars. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Artillery weapons and infantry support weapons, i.e., all types of cannon and ordnance 
(fixed or on wheels, tracks, etc.), such as field, medium, heavy and super-heavy artillery, 

• long-range guns, anti-aircraft guns, anti-tank guns, howitzers and mortars. 

Long-range guns mounted on railway wagons also fall in this heading (and not in 
Chapter 86). Mobile and self-propelled guns, which should be distinguished from tanks and 
other armoured fighting vehicles of heading 87.10, are also classified here. 

(2) Arms capable of continuous and very rapid fire; some are suitable for handling by one 
man. 

This group includes machine-guns, sub-machine-guns (machine-pistols) and other 
continuous-fire weapons. 

(3) Military firearms such as rifles and carbines. 

(4) Other specialised military projectors, for example, military rocket projectors and 
launchers, other than those of heading 93.03; apparatus for the discharge of depth-charges; 
torpedo tubes; flame-throwers (apparatus for projecting an ignited volatile liquid at an 
enemy) other than flame guns specialised for destroying weeds (heading 84.24). 

• 

• 
XIX-9301-1 



93.02 

93.02 - Revolvers and pistol , other than those of heading 93.03 or 93.04. 

This heading covers revolvers and pistols, whatever the calibre, which are capable of 
discharging any missile (other than signal flares) by firing an explosive charge, and which are 
designed to be held in and fired from the hand. 

Revolvers are single barrelle firearms incorporating a revolving cylinder. 

Pistols have one or more ba els. They may also have interchangeable barrels. Semi-automatic 
pistols have a magazine whit can be loaded with several rounds of ammunition, but the trigger 
must be operated for each rour fired. 

The heading also covers miniature pistols and revolvers; it also includes such weapons made in 
the form of other objects, for xample, pencils, pocket knives or cigarette cases, provided they 
are, in fact, firearms. 

The heading excludes continuou fire weapons (i.e., those which use pistol ammunition and which, once 
pressure has been applied to the gger, continue to fire until either the magazine is exhausted or pressure 
is released from the trigger); thes are classified in heading 93.01 as sub-machine-guns (machine-pistols). 
They may be capable of being fired from the hand, but usually have extended stocks. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Captive-bolt type humane k llers, Very pistols for the discharge of signal flares, pistols or revolvers 
for the firing of blank ca ridges (with solid or blocked barrels, or with tapered cylinders) for 
race-starting, theatrical prop • rty pistols, "black powder" muzzle-loading pistols neither designed for 
nor capable of firing a cartri ge (heading 93.03). 

(b) Spring, air or gas pistols (he ding 93.04). 

XIX-9302-1 



• 93.03 

93.03 - Other firearms and similar devices which operate by the firing of an explosive 
charge (for example, sporting shotguns and rifles, muzzle-loading firearms, Very 
pistols and other devices designed to project only signal flares, pistols and revolvers 
for firing blank ammunition, captive-bolt humane killers, line-throwing guns). 

9303.10 - Muzzle-loading firearms 

9303.20 - Other sporting, hunting or target-shooting shotguns, including combination 
shotgun-rifles 

9303.30 - Other sporting, hunting or target-shooting rifles 

9303.90 - Other 

This heading includes all firearms not covered by headings 93.01 and 93.02; it includes some 
devices which are not weapons but which operate by the firing of an explosive charge. 

• The heading includes : 

(1) Sporting, hunting and target shooting guns, rifles and carbines of all calibres, 
smooth-bored or rifled. Sporting and hunting guns frequently have more than one barrel 
and sometimes have one smooth-bore barrel and one rifled barrel and may have 
interchangeable barrels (smooth-bore and rifled). They often have decorative chasing on 
metal parts and carved butts. Target shooting guns usually have only one barrel. 

These guns may fire only one round at a time and be required to be reloaded manually after 
each shot, or they may be fitted with a magazine and capable of repetition firing, or they 
may have a mechanism for rapid semi-automatic fire. 

Sporting guns made to resemble walking-sticks are included in this group. 

(2) Duck cannon (punt-guns), specially designed for shooting waterfowl. They are usually 
mounted on a stand or support designed to be fixed to a boat. 

(3) Muzzle-loading ("black powder") firearms neither designed for nor capable of firing a 
cartridge. 

(4) Very pistols and other devices designed to project only signal flares. 

(5) Dummy, imitation or safety pistols and revolvers capable of firing only blank cartridges. 
They may have solid or blocked barrels with a vent for the escape of gases. Certain 
revolvers may have the chambers in the cylinder tapered, while some starters' or stage 
property pistols have no barrel. When used for starting races, these pistols may be fitted 
with electrical devices which actuate chronometer equipment. 

(6) Captive-bolt humane killers. These resemble pistols for firing blank cartridges. The 
explosion drives forward a bolt sliding within the barrel in order to kill or stun the animal. 
The bolt does not leave the pistol but is drawn back for further use. 
The heading excludes bullet-type pistols (usually of large calibre), occasionally used for 
slaughtering animals (heading 93.02). 

• 
XIX-9303-1 



93.03 • 
(7) Line-throwing guns, us d mainly on board ship or at lifeboat stations for life-saving and 

establishing communicat on. 

(8) Harpoon guns, used for propelling a harpoon attached to a line to catch fish, marine 
mammals, turtles, etc. 

(9) Warning guns, mortars and similar apparatus, firing blank ammunition, used to raise an 
alarm (e.g., at lifeboat st tions), to celebrate an event or to give warning of the presence of 
poachers, etc. 

(10) "Hail cannon", a kind o cannon consisting of a truncated sheet-iron cone, for firing at hail 
clouds to cause rain. 

The heading excludes riveting tools, wall-plugging tools, etc., operated by means of an explosive charge 
(heading 82.05). 

XIX-9303-2 



• 93.04 

93.04 - Other arms (for example, spring, air or gas guns and pistols, truncheons), excluding 
those of heading 93.07. 

The heading covers arms other than firearms of headings 93.01 to 93.03 and arms of 
heading 93.07. 

It includes the following : 

(1) Truncheons, life-preservers, weighted canes and the like for police, etc., and loaded 
walking-sticks. 

(2) Knuckledusters, i.e., pieces of metal shaped to fit a clenched fist and with which blows 
are delivered. 

(3)  Catapults designed for shooting at birds or pests. They may be in the form of a 
walking-stick. 

• Toy catapults are excluded (heading 95.03). 

(4) Air guns, rifles and pistols. These resemble normal rifles, pistols, etc., but they have 
provision for compressing a column of air which is released into the barrel of the weapon 
when the trigger is pulled, thus ejecting the ammunition. 

Guns, rifles and pistols operating on the same principle, but with gases other than air, are 
also included. 

(5) Similar weapons operated by the release of a heavy spring mechanism. 

(6) Guns and pistols, operated by compressed carbon dioxide gas, for remote projection of an 
automatic syringe, containing an anaesthetic or a medicament (antiserum, vaccine, etc.) at 
free-roaming animals. 

(7)  Aerosol spray cans containing tear gas. 

• 

• 
XIX-9304-1 



93.05 • 
93.05 - Parts and accessorie$ of articles of headings 93.01 to 93.04. 

9305.10 - Of revolv s or pistols 

9305.20 - Of shot 	or rifles of heading 93.03 

- Other : 

9305.91 - - Of milita weapons of heading 93.01 

9305.99 - - Other 

The parts and accessories of is heading include : 

(1) Parts for military we pons, e.g., liners (tubes for barrels), recoil mechanisms and 
breeches for guns of all kinds; turrets, carriages, tripods and other special mountings for 
guns, machine-guns, sub-machine-guns, etc., whether or not with aiming and loading 
mechanisms. 

(2) Metal castings, stampi1g)s  and forgings, for military small arms, sporting and target 
shooting guns, etc., rev lvers and pistols, e.g., barrels, breeches, locks, trigger guards, 
tumblers, levers, percussion hammers, cocking pieces, triggers, sears, extractors, ejectors, 
frames (of pistols), plates, butt plates, safety catches, cylinders (for revolvers), front and 
back sights, magazines. 

(3) Protective covers and potective cases, for butts, sights, barrels or breeches. 

(4) Morris tubes, etc. (small bore tubes for insertion in heavier calibre guns and rifles for 
practice on miniature ran es). 

(5) Butt stocks and other vv ooden parts for guns, rifles or carbines and butts and plates (of 
wood, metal, ebonite, etc) for revolvers and pistols. 

(6) Slings, band, piling or tacking and butt swivels and swivel bands for guns, rifles or 
carbines. 

(7) Silencers (sound modera ors). 

(8) Removable recoil absor ers for sporting or target shooting guns. 
The heading excludes : 

(a) Parts of general use as defined in Note 2 to Section XV (e.g., screws, rivets and springs), of base 
metal (Section XV), and similar goods of plastics (Chapter 39). 

(b) Gun cases (heading 42.02). 
(c) Gun cameras for aircraft (heading 90.07). 
(d) Telescopic sights and similar sights for arms (heading 90.13). 
(e) Accessories more specificall covered by other headings of the Nomenclature, such as pull-throughs, 

cleaning rods and other cle ng tools for arms (headings 82.05, 96.03, etc.). 

XIX-9305-1 



• 93.06 

93.06 - Bombs, grenades, torpedoes, mines, missiles and similar munitions of war and parts 
thereof; cartridges and other ammunition and projectiles and parts thereof, 
including shot and cartridge wads. 

- Shotgun cartridges and parts thereof; air gun pellets : 

9306.21 - - Cartridges 

9306.29 - - Other 

9306.30 - Other cartridges and parts thereof 

9306.90 - Other 

This heading includes : 

(A) Ammunition, e.g. : 

(1) Shells (explosive, shrapnel, armour piercing, star, flare, tracer, incendiary, smoke, etc.), 
and all other types of ammunition for guns and mortars. 

(2) Cartridges of all types : blank (including blank cartridges for riveting tools or for 
starting compression ignition internal combustion piston engines), bulleted, tracer, 
incendiary, armour piercing, ball and shot cartridges for sporting guns, etc. 

(3) Slugs, pellets (hollow, spherical, waisted, etc.) and darts for air, gas or spring guns, 
carbines or pistols, other than those for toys of heading 95.03. 

(B) Ballistic missiles whose payload returns to the earth's surface after reaching its apogee and 
which impart to the payload a terminal velocity not exceeding 7,000 m/s . 

(C) Munitions of a type which contain their own means of propulsion after launching, for 
example, torpedoes, flying bombs (missiles resembling aircraft), guided air missiles and 
rocket type ammunition. 

(D) Other munitions of war, for example, land and sea mines, depth charges, hand and rifle 
grenades, aerial bombs. 

(E) Harpoons, whether or not with explosive heads, for harpoon guns, etc. 

(F) Parts of ammunition and munitions of war, for example : 

(1) Grenade, mine, bomb, shell and torpedo bodies. 

(2) Cartridge cases and other parts of cartridges, for example, bases (of brass), inner cups 
and inner bases and linings (of metal or paperboard) and wads (of felt, paper or cork, 
etc.). 

(3) Bullets and lead shot, prepared for ammunition. 

(4) Fuses (point and base detonating), whether time, percussion or proximity 
(electronically operated), for shells, torpedoes, etc.; parts of fuses, including protective 
caps. 

(5) Mechanical parts for certain munitions, such as special propellers and gyroscopes for 
torpedoes. 

XIX-9306-1 



93.06 • 
(6) War-heads and buoy cy chambers for torpedoes. 

(7) Strikers, safety pins, evers and other parts of grenades. 

(8) Fins for bombs. 
The heading excludes : 

(a) Propellantpowders and pr ared explosives, even if put up in forms ready for incorporation in 
munitions (headings 36.01 nd 36.02); safety fuses, detonating fuses, percussion and detonating 
caps, igniters and electric detonators, including primers for shells (heading 36.03). 

(b) Signalling flares and rain ro kets (heading 36.04). 

(c) Charges for fire-extinguishes, and charged fire-extinguishing grenades (heading 38.13). 

(d) Motors of heading 84.11 or !34.12, for rockets, torpedoes and similar missiles. 

(e) Radio or radar apparatus of heading 85.26 (see Note 2 to this Chapter). 

(f) Watch or clock movements nd parts thereof, for munitions or for parts of munitions (e.g., for fuses) 
(headings 91.08 to 91.10 and 91.14). 

XIX-9306-2 



• 93.07 

93.07 - Swords, cutlasses, bayonets, lances and similar arms and parts thereof and 
scabbards and sheaths thereof. 

This heading covers weapons such as swords (including sword-sticks), cutlasses, bayonets, 
lances, spears, pikes, halberds, kukris commando knives, dirks, stilettos and daggers. Their 
blades usually consist of high quality steel, and in some cases a more or less elaborate shield or 
handguard is included. 

The weapons remain classified in this heading even if used only for ceremonial or decorative 
purposes, or as theatrical properties. 

Most of the weapons have a fixed blade, but some daggers and stilettos may have a movable 
blade normally housed within the handle. The blade may be opened and locked in position by 
hand or by a spring mechanism. 

This heading also includes parts, for example, sword blades (including blanks therefor, even if 
only forged), hilts, guards and handles, and scabbards and sheaths for swords, bayonets, 
daggers, etc. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Belts and similar accoutrements, designed to support swords, bayonets, etc., of leather 
(heading 42.03) or of textile materials (heading 62.17); sword-knots (generally heading 42.05 
or 63.07). 

(b) Hunting, camping and other knives, being cutlery (heading 82.11) or sheaths for such knives 
(generally heading 42.02). 

(c) Scabbards and sheaths of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal (heading 71.15). 

(d) Fencing foils (heading 95.06). 

XIX-9307-1 



• 

0 

• 



• 
Section XX 

MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURED ARTICLES 

• 

• 

• 
XX-1 



• 

• 

• 

• 



• 94 

Chapter 94 

Furniture; bedding, mattresses, mattress supports, cushions and similar stuffed 
furnishings; lamps and lighting fittings, not elsewhere specified or included; 

illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and the like; prefabricated buildings 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Pneumatic or water mattresses, pillows or cushions, of Chapter 39, 40 or 63; 

(b) Mirrors designed for placing on the floor or ground (for example, cheval-glasses 
(swing-mirrors)) of heading 70.09; 

(c) Articles of Chapter 71; 

(d) Parts of general use as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV), or similar 
goods of plastics (Chapter 39), or safes of heading 83.03; 

(e) Furniture specially designed as parts of refrigerating or freezing equipment of heading 84.18; 
furniture specially designed for sewing machines (heading 84.52); 

(f) Lamps or lighting fittings of Chapter 85; 

(g) Furniture specially designed as parts of apparatus of heading 85.18 (heading 85.18), of 
heading 85.19 or 85.21 (heading 85.22) or of headings 85.25 to 85.28 (heading 85.29); 

(h) Articles of heading 87.14; 

(ij) Dentists' chairs incorporating dental appliances of heading 90.18 or dentists' spittoons 
(heading 90.18); 

(k) Articles of Chapter 91 (for example, clocks and clock cases); 

(1) Toy furniture or toy lamps or lighting fittings (heading 95.03), billiard tables or other furniture 
specially constructed for games (heading 95.04), furniture for conjuring tricks or decorations 
(other than electric garlands) such as Chinese lanterns (heading 95.05); or 

(m) Monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles (heading 96.20). 

2.- The articles (other than parts) referred to in headings 94.01 to 94.03 are to be classified in those 
headings only if they are designed for placing on the floor or ground. 

The following are, however, to be classified in the above-mentioned headings even if they are 
designed to be hung, to be fixed to the wall or to stand one on the other : 

(a) Cupboards, bookcases, other shelved furniture (including single shelves presented with supports 
for fixing them to the wall) and unit furniture; 

(b) Seats and beds. 

3.- (A) In headings 94.01 to 94.03 references to parts of goods do not include references to sheets or 
slabs (whether or not cut to shape but not combined with other parts) of glass (including 
mirrors), marble or other stone or of any other material referred to in Chapter 68 or 69. 

(B) Goods described in heading 94.04, presented separately, are not to be classified in heading 94.01, 
94.02 or 94.03 as parts of goods. 

4.- For the purposes of heading 94.06, the expression "prefabricated buildings" means buildings which 
are finished in the factory or put up as elements, presented together, to be assembled on site, such as 
housing or worksite accommodation, offices, schools, shops, sheds, garages or similar buildings. 

XX-94-1 



94 • 
GENERAL 

This Chapter covers, subject to the exclusions listed in the Explanatory Notes to this Chapter : 

(1)  All furniture and parts thereof (headings 94.01 to 94.03). 

(2)  Mattress supports, mattresses and other articles of bedding or similar furnishing, sprung, 
stuffed or internally fitted with any material, or of cellular rubber or plastics, whether or 
not covered (heading 94.04). 

(3) Lamps and lighting fitti gs and parts thereof, not elsewhere specified or included, of any 
material (excluding thos of materials described in Note 1 to Chapter 71), and illuminated 
signs, illuminated name- lates and the like, having a permanently fixed light source, and 
parts thereof not elsewhe e specified or included (heading 94.05). 

(4) Prefabricated buildings (heading 94.06). 

For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "furniture" means : 

(A) Any "movable" articles (not included under other more specific headings of the 
Nomenclature), which have the essential characteristic that they are constructed for placing 
on the floor or ground, land which are used, mainly with a utilitarian purpose, to equip 
private dwellings, hotels theatres, cinemas, offices, churches, schools, cafes, restaurants, 
laboratories, hospitals, dentists' surgeries, etc., or ships, aircraft, railway coaches, motor 
vehicles, caravan-trailers or similar means of transport. (It should be noted that, for the 
purposes of this Chapter, articles are considered to be "movable" furniture even if they are 
designed for bolting, etc., to the floor, e.g., chairs for use on ships). Similar articles (seats, 
chairs, etc.) for use in gardens, squares, promenades, etc., are also included in this 
category. 

(B) The following : 

(i) Cupboards, bookcases, other shelved furniture (including single shelves presented with 
supports for fixing them to the wall) and unit furniture, designed to be hung, to be 
fixed to the wall or to stand one on the other or side by side, for holding various objects 
or articles (books, cockery, kitchen utensils, glassware, linen, medicaments, toilet 
articles, radio or t levision receivers, ornaments, etc.) and separately presented 
elements of unit furniture. 

(ii) Seats or beds designed to be hung or to be fixed to the wall. 

Except for the goods referred to in subparagraph (B) above, the term "furniture" does not apply to 
articles used as furniture but designed for placing on other furniture or shelves or for hanging on walls or 
from the ceiling. 

It therefore follows that this Chpter does not cover other wall fixtures such as coat, hat and similar • 
racks, key racks, clothes-brushbangers and newspaper racks, nor furnishings such as radiator screens. 
Similarly, the Chapter excludes e following types of goods not designed for placing on the floor : small 
articles of cabinet-work and small furnishing goods of wood (heading 44.20), and office equipment (e.g., 
sorting boxes, paper trays) of plaOtics or of base metal (heading 39.26 or 83.04). 

However, equipment (cupboards, radiator screens, etc.) built-in or designed to be built-in, 
presented at the same time s the prefabricated buildings of heading 94.06 and forming an 
integral part thereof, remain cl ssified in that heading. 

Headings 94.01 to 94.03 cove articles of furniture of any material (wood, osier, bamboo, cane, 
plastics, base metals, glass, eather, stone, ceramics, etc.). Such furniture remains in these 
headings whether or not stuff d or covered, with worked or unworked surfaces, carved, inlaid, 
decoratively painted, fitted wit mirrors or other glass fitments, or on castors, etc. 

• 
XX-94-2 



• 94 

It should, however, be noted that furniture is excluded if it incorporates more than minor components 
(e.g., monograms, bands, ferrules, etc.) of precious metal or of metal clad with precious metal 
(Chapter 71). 

Articles of furniture presented disassembled or unassembled are to be treated as assembled 
articles of furniture, provided the parts are presented together. This applies whether or not the 
furniture incorporates sheets, fittings or other parts of glass, marble or other materials (e.g., a 
wooden table with a glass top, a wooden wardrobe with a mirror, a sideboard with a marble 
top). 

PARTS 

This Chapter only covers parts, whether or not in the rough, of the goods of headings 94.01 
to 94.03 and 94.05, when identifiable by their shape or other specific features as parts designed 
solely or principally for an article of those headings. They are classified in this Chapter when 
not more specifically covered elsewhere. 

Parts of prefabricated buildings of heading 94.06, presented separately, are in all cases classified in their 
own appropriate headings. 

In addition to the exclusions referred to in the individual Explanatory Notes below, this Chapter also 
excludes : 

(a) Beadings and mouldings, of heading 44.09. 

(b) Grooved strips of particle board, covered with plastics or other materials, intended to be cut and then 
folded along these cuts into a "U" shape so as to form parts of furniture (e.g., partitions of a drawer) 
(heading 44.10). 

(c) Sheets of glass (including mirrors), marble or other stone or of any other material referred to in 
Chapter 68 or 69, whether or not cut to shape, unless they are combined with other parts which 
clearly identify them as parts of furniture (e.g., a mirror-door for a wardrobe). 

(d) Springs, locks and other parts of general use as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal 
(Section XV), and similar goods of plastics (Chapter 39). 

(e) Toy furniture and toy lamps or lighting fittings (heading 95.03). 

(f) Collectors' pieces and antiques (Chapter 97). 

XX-94-3 



94.01 • 
94.01 - Seats (other than those of heading 94.02), whether or not convertible into beds, and 

parts thereof (+). 

9401.10 - Seats of a kind used for aircraft 

9401.20 - Seats of aind used for motor vehicles 

9401.30 - Swivel seas with variable height adjustment 

9401.40 - Seats othe than garden seats or camping equipment, convertible into beds 

- Seats of ca ie, osier, bamboo or similar materials : 

9401.52 - - Of bamb 0 

9401.53 - - Of rattan 

9401.59 - - Other 

- Other seat , with wooden frames : 

9401.61 - - Upholstered 

9401.69 - - Other 

- Other seat , with metal frames : 

9401.71 - - Upholstered 

9401.79 - - Other 

9401.80 - Other seats 

9401.90 - Parts 

Subject to the exclusions mentioned below, this heading covers all seats (including those for 
vehicles, provided that they comply with the conditions prescribed in Note 2 to this Chapter), 
for example : 

Lounge chairs, arm-chairs, fo ding chairs, deck chairs, infants' high chairs and children's seats 
designed to be hung on the ack of other seats (including vehicle seats), grandfather chairs, 
benches, couches (including t ose with electrical heating), settees, sofas, ottomans and the like, 
stools (such as piano stools, draughtsmen's stools, typists' stools, and dual purpose stool-steps), 
seats which incorporate a sound system and are suitable for use with video game consoles and 
machines, television or satellite receivers, as well as with DVD, music CD, MP3 or video 
cassette players. 

Seats of this heading may incorporate complementary non-seat components, for example, toy 
components, a vibration functilon, music or sound players, as well as lighting features. 

Armchairs, couches, settees, etc., remain in this heading even if they are convertible into beds. 

The heading does not, however, include : 

(a) Steps (usually headings 44.21 and 73.26). 

(b) Seat-sticks (heading 66.02). 

(c) Articles of heading 87.14 (e.g., saddles). 

(d) Adjustable-speed revolving hairs for reflex-testing (heading 90.19). 
(e) Chairs and seats of heading 94.02. 

(f) Stools and foot-stools (whether or not rocking) designed to rest the feet, baby walkers, and linen and 
similar chests having a subsidiary use as seats (heading 94.03). 

XX-9401-1 



• 94.01 

PARTS 

The heading also covers identifiable parts of chairs or other seats, such as backs, bottoms and 
arm-rests (whether or not upholstered with straw or cane, stuffed or sprung), and spiral springs 
assembled for seat upholstery. 

Separately presented cushions and mattresses, sprung, stuffed or internally fitted with any 
material or of cellular rubber or plastics whether or not covered, are excluded (heading 94.04) 
even if they are clearly specialised as parts of upholstered seats (e.g., settees, couches, sofas). 
When these articles are combined with other parts of seats, however, they remain classified in 
this heading. They also remain in this heading when presented with the seats of which they form 
part. 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Notes. 

• Subheadings 9401.61 and 9401.71 

"Upholstered seats" are those having a soft layer of, for example, wadding, tow, animal hair, cellular 
plastics or rubber, shaped (whether or not fixed) to the seat and covered with a material such as woven 
fabric, leather or sheeting of plastics. Also classified as upholstered seats are seats the upholstering 
materials of which are not covered or have only a white fabric cover which is itself intended to be covered 
(known as upholstered seats "in muslin"), seats which are presented with detachable seat or back cushions 
and which could not be used without such cushions, and seats with helical springs (for upholstery). On 
the other hand, the presence of horizontally-acting tension springs, designed to attach to the frame a steel 
wire lattice, taut woven fabric, etc., is not sufficient to cause the seats to be classified as upholstered. 
Similarly, seats covered directly with materials such as woven fabric, leather, sheeting of plastics, without 
the interposition of upholstering materials or springs, and seats to which a single woven fabric backed 
with a thin layer of cellular plastics has been applied, are not regarded as upholstered seats. 

Subheading 9401.80 

This subheading also covers safety seats suitable for use for the carriage of infants and toddlers in motor 
vehicles or other means of transport. They are removable and are attached to the vehicle's seats by means 
of the seat belt and a tether strap. 

• 

• 
XX-9401-2 



94.02 

94.02 - Medical, surgical, d ntal or veterinary furniture (for example, operating tables, 
examination tables, ospital beds with mechanical fittings, dentists' chairs); barbers' 
chairs and similar c hairs, having rotating as well as both reclining and elevating 
movements; parts of the foregoing articles. 
9402.10 - Dentists', ►arbers' or similar chairs and parts thereof 

9402.90 - Other 

(A) MEDICAL, SURGICAL, DENTAL OR VETERINARY FURNITURE 

This group includes : 

Operating tables for general or specialised surgery, designed to enable the patient to be 
placed in the position reltjuired for different operations by adjusting, inclining, rotating or 
raising the table. 

Special orthopaedic tablFs for complex operations (e.g., on the hips, shoulders, spinal 
column). 

Vivisection and similar bles for animals, frequently equipped with restraining apparatus. 

Tables, table-beds and th like for clinical examinations, medical treatment, massage, etc.; 
beds and seats, e.g., for obstetrical, gynaecological, urological, cystoscopical, etc., 
examinations or operations, or for use in ear, nose, throat or eye treatment. 
It should, however, be noted that the heading excludes tables and seats specialised for X-ray work, 
etc. (heading 90.22). 

Special seats for doctors and surgeons. 

Confinement beds (sometimes called birthing beds), usually consisting of a lower part with 
a basin which slides under the upper part. 

Mechanical beds for raising injured or sick persons without shaking, or for giving them 
hygienic attention without moving them. 

Beds with hinged mattress-supports specially designed for therapeutic treatment of 
pulmonary tuberculosis or other diseases. 

(9) Beds combined with splits or other dislocation or fracture appliances and the like. 

However, when such equip ent is of a type designed to be simply attached to, but not fixed to the 
bed, it falls in heading 90/ ; beds without the mechanism fall in heading 94.03. 

(10) Stretchers and trolley-stre chers for moving patients inside hospitals, clinics, etc. 

Carriages used to carry disa led persons in the street are excluded (Chapter 87). 

XX-9402-1 



• 94.02 

(11) Small tables, table-cupboards and the like, whether or not on wheels (trolleys), of a type 
specially designed for instruments or bandages, medical or surgical supplies or anaesthetic 
equipment; instrument sterilising trolleys; special disinfection wash-basins, self-opening 
sterile dressing boxes (generally on wheels) and waste bins for soiled dressings (whether or 
not on wheels); bottle-holders, irrigator or douche carriers and the like, whether or not on 
pivoting castors; special instrument or dressing cabinets and cases. 

(12) Dentists' chairs (including anaesthetising chair-beds) not incorporating dental appliances of 
heading 90.18, with mechanisms (usually telescopic) for raising as well as tilting and 
sometimes turning on a centre column, whether or not fitted with equipment such as 
lighting fittings. 

Dentists' spittoon mouth rinsers, whether or not on a base or stand, and dentists' chairs 
incorporating dental appliances of heading 90.18, are excluded (heading 90.18). 

It should be noted that this group is restricted to furniture of a type specially designed for 
medical, surgical, dental or veterinary use; furniture for general use not having such 
characteristics is therefore excluded. 

(B) BARBERS' CHAIRS AND SIMILAR CHAIRS, HAVING ROTATING AS 
0	 WELL AS BOTH RECLINING AND ELEVATING MOVEMENTS 

This group includes barbers' chairs and similar chairs, having rotating as well as both reclining 
and elevating movements. 

It should, however, be noted that the heading excludes piano stools, mechanical type rocking-chairs, 
swivel chairs, etc. (heading 94.01). 

(C) PARTS 
Parts of the foregoing articles are classified in this heading provided they are recognisable as 
such parts. 

These parts include : 

(1) Articles of a kind specially designed for fixing to operating tables to immobilise patients 
(such as shoulder, leg or thigh grips, leg supports, immobilising head-rests, arm or thorax 
supports and the like). 

(2) Certain clearly identifiable parts of dentists' chairs (e.g., head-rests, back pieces, foot-rests, 
arm-rests, elbow-rests, etc.). 

o 

• 
XX-9402-2 



94.03 • 
94.03 - Other furniture and parts thereof. 

9403.10 - Metal furniture of a kind used in offices 

9403.20 - Other metal furniture 

9403.30 - Wooden furniture of a kind used in offices 

9403.40 - Wooden furniture of a kind used in the kitchen 

9403.50 - Wooden funiture of a kind used in the bedroom 

9403.60 - Other wooden furniture 

9403.70 - Furniture oi plastics 

- Furniture of other materials, including cane, osier, bamboo or similar 
materials : 

9403.82 - - Of bambo 

9403.83 - - Of rattan 

9403.89 - - Other 

9403.90 - Parts 

This heading covers furnitur and parts thereof, not covered by the previous headings. It 
includes furniture for genera, use (e.g., cupboards, show-cases, tables, telephone stands, 
writing-desks, escritoires, book-cases, and other shelved furniture (including single shelves 
presented with supports for fixing them to the wall), etc.), and also furniture for special uses. 

The heading includes furnitures for : 

(1) Private dwellings, hotels, etc., such as : cabinets, linen chests, bread chests, log chests; 
chests of drawers, tallboys; pedestals, plant stands; dressing-tables; pedestal tables; 
wardrobes, linen presses;1  hall stands, umbrella stands; side-boards, dressers, cupboards; 
food-safes; bedside tables; beds (including wardrobe beds, camp-beds, folding beds, cots, 
etc.); needlework tables; stools and foot-stools (whether or not rocking) designed to rest the 
feet, fire screens; draught screens; pedestal ashtrays; music cabinets, music stands or desks; 
play-pens; serving trolley (whether or not fitted with a hot plate). 

(2) Offices, such as : clothes lockers, filing cabinets, filing trolleys, card index files, etc. 

(3) Schools, such as : school-desks, lecturers' desks, easels (for blackboards, etc.). 

(4) Churches, such as : altars, confessional boxes, pulpits, communion benches, lecterns, etc. 

(5)  Shops, stores, worksh ps, etc., such as : counters; dress racks; shelving units; 
compartment or drawer c pboards; cupboards for tools, etc.; special furniture (with cases 
or drawers) for printing-w irks. 

(6)  Laboratories or techni al offices, such as : microscope tables; laboratory benches 
(whether or not with gl ss cases, gas nozzles and tap fittings, etc.); fume-cupboards; 
unequipped drawing table 

The heading does not include : 

(a) Travelling chests, trunks and the like, not having the character of furniture (heading 42.02). 

(b) Ladders and steps, trestles, carpenters' benches and the like not having the character of furniture; 
these are classified according to their constituent material (headings 44.21, 73.26, etc.). 

XX-9403-1 



• 94.03 

(c) Builders' fittings (e.g., frames, doors and shelves) for cupboards, etc. to be built into walls 
(heading 44.18 if of wood). 

(d) Waste-paper baskets (of plastics, heading 39.26; of basket or wickerwork, heading 46.02; of base 
metal, headings 73.26, 74.19, etc.). 

(e) Hammocks (generally heading 56.08 or 63.06). 

(f) Mirrors designed for standing on the ground, such as cheval-glasses, swing-mirrors for shoe-shops, 
tailors, etc. (heading 70.09). 

(g) Armoured or reinforced safes (heading 83.03). On the other hand, containers specially designed to 
resist fire, impact and crushing and whose walls in particular do not offer any serious resistance to 
attempts at breaking them open by drilling or cutting are classified in this heading. 

(h) Refrigerators, ice cream machines, etc. (i.e., cabinets, etc., having the character of furniture but also 
equipped either with a refrigerating unit or with an evaporator of a refrigerating unit, or designed to 
receive such equipment) (heading 84.18) (see Note (1) (e) to this Chapter). However, ice-boxes, 
ice-chests and tine like, and also insulated cabinets not equipped or designed to contain an active 

• refrigerating element but insulated simply by glass fibre, cork, wool, etc., remain classified in this 
heading. 

Furniture specially designed for containing or providing a stand for sewing machines, whether or not 
it has a subsidiary use as furniture when the machine is not in use; protective covers, drawers, 
extensions and other component parts of such furniture (heading 84.52). 

(k) Furniture specially designed as part of apparatus of heading 85.18 (heading 85.18), of heading 85.19 
or 85.21 (heading 85.22) or of headings 85.25 to 85.28 (heading 85.29). 

(1) Drawing tables fitted with instruments such as pantographs, (heading 90.17). 

(m) Dentists' spittoons (heading 90.18). 

(n) Mattress supports (heading 94.04). 

(o)  Standard lamps and other lamps and lighting fittings (heading 94.05). 

(p)  Billiard tables, or other furniture specially constructed for games, of heading 95.04, and tables for 
conjuring tricks, of heading 95.05. 

• 

• 
XX-9403-2 



94.04 • 
94.04 - Mattress supports; krticles of bedding and similar furnishing (for example, 

mattresses, quilts, eiderdowns, cushions, pouffes and pillows) fitted with springs or 
stuffed or internally fitted with any material or of cellular rubber or plastics, 
whether or not covered. 

9404.10 - Mattress su ports 

- Mattresses 

9404.21 - - Of cellula rubber or plastics, whether or not covered 

9404.29 - - Of other materials 

9404.30 - Sleeping b gs 

9404.90 - Other 

This heading covers : 

(A) Mattress supports, i.e., t e sprung. part of a bed, normally consisting of a wooden or metal 
frame fitted with springs r steel wire mesh (spring or wire supports), or of a wooden frame 
with internal springs and ltuffing covered with fabric (mattress bases). 

But the heading excludes spiral springs assembled together for chairs or other seats (heading 94.01) 
and woven iron or steel wtrel mesh, unmounted (heading 73.14). 

(B) Articles of bedding and Similar furnishing which are sprung or stuffed or internally fitted 
with any material (cotton, wool, horsehair, down, synthetic fibres, etc.), or are of cellular 
rubber or plastics (whether or not covered with woven fabric, plastics, etc.). For example : 

(1) Mattresses, including mattresses with a metal frame. 

(2) Quilts and bedspreads (including counterpanes, and also quilts for baby-carriages), 
eiderdowns and duvets (whether of down or any other filling), mattress-protectors (a 
kind of thin mattress placed between the mattress itself and the mattress support), 
bolsters, pillows, cushions, pouffes, etc. 

(3) Sleeping bags. 

These articles remain classified in this heading whether or not they incorporate electric heating 
elements. 

This heading also excludes : 

(a) Water-mattresses (generally heading 39.26 or 40.16). 

(b) Pneumatic mattresses or pillows (heading 39.26, 40.16 or 63.06) or pneumatic cushions 
(heading 39.26, 40.14, 40.16, 63.06 or 63.07). 

(c) Leather covers for pouffes (heading 42.05). 

(d) Blankets (heading 63.01). 

(e) Pillow-cases, eiderdown or d vet covers (heading 63.02). 

(f) Cushion covers (heading 63. 4). 

See the Explanatory Note to heading 94.01 concerning cushions or mattresses having the 
character of parts of seats. 

XX-9404-1 



• 94.05 

94.05 - Lamps and lighting fittings including searchlights and spotlights and parts thereof, 
not elsewhere specified or included; illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and 
the like, having a permanently fixed light source, and parts thereof not elsewhere 
specified or included. 
9405.10 - Chandeliers and other electric ceiling or wall lighting fittings, excluding 

those of a kind used for lighting public open spaces or thoroughfares 

9405.20 - Electric table, desk, bedside or floor-standing lamps 

9405.30 - Lighting sets of a kind used for Christmas trees 

9405.40 - Other electric lamps and lighting fittings 

9405.50 - Non-electrical lamps and lighting fittings 

9405.60 - Illuminated signs, illuminated name-plates and the like 

- Parts : 

9405.91 - - Of glass 

9405.92 - - Of plastics 

9405.99 - - Other 

(I) LAMPS AND LIGHTING FITTINGS, 
NOT ELSEWHERE SPECIFIED OR INCLUDED 

Lamps and lighting fittings of this group can be constituted of any material (excluding those 
materials described in Note 1 to Chapter 71) and use any source of light (candles, oil, petrol, 
paraffin (or kerosene), gas, acetylene, electricity, etc.). Electrical lamps and lighting fittings of 
this heading may be equipped with lamp-holders, switches, flex and plugs, transformers, etc., 
or, as in the case of fluorescent strip fixtures, a starter or a ballast. 

This heading covers in particular : 

(1) Lamps and lighting fittings normally used for the illumination of rooms, e.g. : hanging 
lamps; bowl lamps; ceiling lamps; chandeliers; wall lamps; standard lamps; table lamps; 
bedside lamps; desk lamps; night lamps; water-tight lamps. 

(2) Lamps for exterior lighting, e.g. : street lamps; porch and gate lamps; special illumination 
lamps for public buildings, monuments, parks. 

(3) Specialised lamps, e.g.: darkroom lamps; machine lamps (presented separately); 
photographic studio lamps; inspection lamps (other than those of headin 85.12); 
non-flashing beacons for aerodromes; shop window lamps; electric garlands including 
those fitted with fancy lamps for carnival or entertainment purposes or for ecorating 
Christmas trees). 

(4) Lamps and lighting fittings for the vehicles of Chapter 86, for aircraft or for ships or 
boats, e.g. : headlamps for trains; locomotive and railway rolling stock lanterns; headlamps 
for aircraft; ships' or boats' lanterns. It should be noted, however, that sealed beam lamp 
units are classified in heading 85.39. 

XX-9405-1 



94.05 • 
(5) Portable lamps (other tl an those of heading 85.13), e.g., : hurricane lamps; stable lamps; 

hand lanterns; miners' la ps; quarrymen's lamps. 

(6) Candelabra, candlestic , candle brackets, e.g., for pianos. 

This group also includes searchlights and spotlights. These throw a concentrated beam of light 
(which can usually be regulated) over a distance onto a given point or surface, by means of a 
reflector and lenses, or with a reflector only. The reflectors are usually of silvered glass, or of 
polished, silvered or chromiuln-plated metal. The lenses are usually plano-convex or stepped 
(Fresnel lenses). 

Searchlights are used, e.g., for anti-aircraft operations, and spotlights, e.g., for stage sets and in 
photographic or film studios. 

(II) ILLUMINATED SIGNS, ILLUMINATED NAME-PLATES AND THE LIKE 

This group covers advertising lamps, signs, illuminated name-plates (including road signs) and 
like articles such as advertising plates and address plates, of any material, provided that they 
have a permanently fixed light source. 

* * 

PARTS 

The heading also covers identifiable parts of lamps and lighting fittings, illuminated signs, 
illuminated name-plates and th like, not more specifically covered elsewhere, e.g., : 

(1) Suspension assemblies (rigid or chain type) for lighting pendants. 

(2) Globe holders. 

(3) Bases, handles and cases r hand lamps. 

(4) Burners for lamps; mantle holders. 

(5) Lantern frames. 

(6) Reflectors. 

(7) Lamp glasses or chimneys (bottle-necked, etc.). 

(8) Small cylinders of thick gl ss for miner's safety lamps. 

(9) Diffusers (including alaba ter diffusers). 

(10) Bowls, cups, shades (including skeleton wire frames for making lampshades), globes and 
similar articles. 

(11) Chandelier trimmings, su h as balls, pear-shaped drops, flower-shaped pieces, pendants, 
small plates and the like, i entifiable by their size or their fixing or fastening devices. 

XX-9405-2 



• 94.05 

Non-electrical parts of articles of this heading, combined with electrical parts, remain classified 
here. Separately presented electrical fittings (e.g., switches, lamp holders, flex, plugs, 
transformers, starters, ballasts) are excluded (Chapter 85). 

This heading also excludes : 

(a) Candles (heading 34.06). 

(b) Resin torches (heading 36.06). 

(c) Signs, name-plates and the like, not illuminated or illuminated by a light source not permanently 
fixed, (heading 39.26, Chapter 70, heading 83.10, etc.). 

(d) Printed globes, with internal lighting fittings, of heading 49.05. 

(e) Wicks for lamps, of woven, plaited or knitted textile materials (heading 59.08). 

(f) Glass beads and fancy glass smallwares (e.g., fringes) made of threaded glass beads or bugles and 
intended for trimming lampshades (heading 70.18). 

(g) Electrical lighting and signalling equipment for cycles and motor vehicles (heading 85.12). 

(h) Electric filament lamps, discharge lamps (including tubes in various complex forms such as scrolls, 
letters, figures, stars, etc.) and arc lamps (heading 85.39). 

(ij) Photographic flashlight apparatus (including electrically ignited photographic flashbulbs) 
(heading 90.06). 

(k) Optical light-beam signalling apparatus (heading 90.13). 

(1) Medical diagnostic, probing, irradiation, etc., lamps (heading 90.18). 

(m) Decorations, such as Chinese lanterns (heading 95.05). 

XX-9405-3 



94.06 • 
94.06 - Prefabricated buildings (+). 

9406.10 - Of wood 

9406.90 - Other 

This heading covers prefabriated buildings, also known as "industrialised buildings", of all 
materials. 

These buildings, which can e designed for a variety of uses, such as housing, worksite 
accommodation, offices, sc ools, shops, sheds, garages and greenhouses, are generally 
presented in the form of : 

complete buildings, fully asembled, ready for use; 

complete buildings, unassembled; 

incomplete buildings, whether or not assembled, having the essential character of 
prefabricated buildings. 

In the case of buildings preented unassembled, the necessary elements may be presented 
partially assembled (for example, walls, trusses) or cut to size (beams,joists, in particular) or, in • 
some cases, in indeterminate or random lengths for cutting on the site (sills, insulation, etc.). 

The buildings of this heading ay or may not be equipped. However, only built-in equipment 
normally supplied is to be clas ified with the buildings. This includes electrical fittings (wiring, 
sockets, switches, circuit-brea ers, bells, etc.), heating and air conditioning equipment (boilers, 
radiators, air conditioners, etc.), sanitary equipment (baths, showers, water heaters, etc.), kitchen 
equipment (sinks, hoods, cookers, etc.) and items of furniture which are built in or designed to 
be built in (cupboards, etc.). 

Material for the assembly or finishing of prefabricated buildings (e.g., nails, glues, plaster, 
mortar, electric wire and cables, tubes and pipes, paints, wallpaper, carpeting) is to be classified 
with the buildings, provided it is presented therewith in appropriate quantities. 

Presented separately, parts of buildings and equipment, whether or not identifiable as intended for these 
buildings, are excluded from the heading and are in all cases classified in their own appropriate headings. 

0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 9406.10 

For the purposes of classification in this subheading, the expression "of wood" refers to prefabricated • 
buildings with wooden structure, exterior walls, floor (if floor present), and other characteristic 
constructive elements consisting predominantly of wood. 

• 
XX-9406-1 



• 95 

Chapter 95 

Toys, games and sports requisites; 
parts and accessories thereof 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Candles (heading 34.06); 

(b) Fireworks or other pyrotechnic articles of heading 36.04; 

(c) Yarns, monofilament, cords or gut or the like for fishing, cut to length but not made up into 
fishing lines, of Chapter 39, heading 42.06 or Section XI; 

(d) Sports bags or other containers of heading 42.02, 43.03 or 43.04; 

(e) Fancy dress of textiles, of Chapter 61 or 62; sports clothing and special articles of apparel of 
textiles, of Chapter 61 or 62, whether or not incorporating incidentally protective components 
such as pads or padding in the elbow, knee or groin areas (for example, fencing clothing or 
soccer goalkeeper jerseys); 

(f) Textile flags or bunting, or sails for boats, sailboards or land craft, of Chapter 63; 

(g) Sports footwear (other than skating boots with ice or roller skates attached) of Chapter 64, or 
sports headgear of Chapter 65; 

(h) Walking-sticks, whips, riding-crops or the like (heading 66.02), or parts thereof (heading 66.03); 

(ij) Unmounted glass eyes for dolls or other toys, of heading 70.18; 

(k) Parts of general use, as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV), or similar 
goods of plastics (Chapter 39); 

(1) Bells, gongs or the like of heading 83.06; 

(m) Pumps for liquids (heading 84.13), filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus for liquids or 
gases (heading 84.21), electric motors (heading 85.01), electric transformers (heading 85.04) , 
discs, tapes, solid-state non-volatile storage devices, "smart cards" and other media for the 
recording of sound or of other phenomena, whether or not recorded (heading 85.23), radio 
remote control apparatus (heading 85.26) or cordless infrared remote control devices 
(heading 85.43); 

(n) Sports vehicles (other than bobsleighs, toboggans and the like) of Section XVII; 

(o) Children's bicycles (heading 87.12); 

(p) Sports craft such as canoes and skiffs (Chapter 89), or their means of propulsion (Chapter 44 for 
such articles made of wood); 

(q) Spectacles, goggles or the like, for sports or outdoor games (heading 90.04); 

(r) Decoy calls or whistles (heading 92.08); 

(s) Arms or other articles of Chapter 93; 

(t) Electric garlands of all kinds (heading 94.05); 

(u) Monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles (heading 96.20); 

(v) Racket strings, tents or other camping goods, or gloves, mittens and mitts (classified according to 
their constituent material); or 

(w) Tableware, kitchenware, toilet articles, carpets and other textile floor coverings, apparel, bed 
linen, table linen, toilet linen, kitchen linen and similar articles having a utilitarian function 
(classified according to their constituent material). 

XX-95- 1 



  

95 • 
2.- This Chapter includes articl s in which natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones 

(natural, synthetic or recons cted), precious metal or metal clad with precious metal constitute only 
minor constituents. 

3.- Subject to Note 1 above, pa and accessories which are suitable for use solely or principally with 
articles of this Chapter are to e classified with those articles. 

4.- Subject to the provisions of ote 1 above, heading 95.03 applies, inter alia, to articles of this heading 
combined with one or more items, which cannot be considered as sets under the terms of General 
Interpretative Rule 3 (b), an which, if presented separately, would be classified in other headings, 
provided the articles are pu up together for retail sale and the combinations have the essential 
character of toys. 

5.- Heading 95.03 does not cover articles which, on account of their design, shape or constituent 
material, are identifiable as in ended exclusively for animals, for example, "pet toys" (classification in 
their own appropriate headin 

0 
0 0 

Subheading Note. 

1.- Subheading 9504.50 covers : • 
(a) Video game consoles from which the image is reproduced on a television receiver, a monitor or 

other external screen or surface; or 

(b) Video game machines having a self-contained video screen, whether or not portable. 

This subheading does not cover video game consoles or machines operated by coins, banknotes, bank 
cards, tokens or by any other means of payment (subheading 9504.30). 

GENERAL 
This Chapter covers toys of all kinds whether designed for the amusement of children or adults. 
It also includes equipment for indoor or outdoor games, appliances and apparatus for sports, 
gymnastics or athletics, certai n requisites for fishing, hunting or shooting, and roundabouts and 
other fairground amusements. 

Each of the headings of this C l apter also covers identifiable parts and accessories of articles of 
this Chapter which are suitabl for use solely or principally therewith, and provided they are 
not articles excluded by Note 1 to this Chapter. 

The articles of this Chapter ma y, in general, be made of any material except natural or cultured 
pearls, precious or semi-precio s stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed), precious metal or 
metal clad with precious meta . They may, however, incorporate minor constituents made of 
these materials. 

Apart from the articles excluded in the following Explanatory Notes, this Chapter also excludes : 

(a) Fireworks or other pyrotechnic articles of heading 36.04. 

(b) Rubber tyres and other articles of heading 40.11, 40.12 or 40.13. 
)

(c) Tents and camping goods (generally heading 63.06). 

(d) Pumps for liquids (heading . 4.13), filtering or purifying machinery and apparatus for liquids or 
gases (heading 84.21), electricmotors (heading 85.01), electric transformers (heading 85.04), discs, 
tapes, solid-state non-volatile storage devices, "smart cards" and other media for the recording of 
sound or of other phenomena, whether or not recorded (heading 85.23), radio remote control 
apparatus (heading 85.26) or cordless infrared remote control devices (heading 85.43). 

(e) Arms and other articles of Ch!pter 93. 

• 
XX-95-2 



• 95.01 

[95.01] 

• 

XX-9501-1 



95.02 • 
195.021 

• 

• 
)0C-9502-1 



• 95.03 

95.03 - Tricycles, scooters, pedal cars and similar wheeled toys; dolls' carriages; dolls; other 
toys; reduced-size ("scale") models and similar recreational models, working or not; 
puzzles of all kinds. 

This heading covers : 

(A) Wheeled toys. 

These articles are usually designed for propulsion either by means of pedals, hand levers or 
other simple devices which transmit power to the wheels through a chain or rod, or, as in 
the case of certain scooters, by direct pressure of a person's foot against the ground. Other 
types of wheeled toys may be simply drawn or pushed by another person or driven by a 
motor. 

These toys include : 

(1) Children's tricycles and the like, but excluding bicycles of heading 87.12. 

(2) Two- or three-wheeled scooters designed to be ridden by children, as well as 
youngsters and adults, with an adjustable or non-adjustable steering column and small 
solid or inflatable wheels. They are sometimes equipped with a bicycle-type handle-
bar, a hand brake or a foot brake on the rear wheel. 

(3) Pedal- or hand-propelled wheeled toys in the form of animals. 

(4) Pedal cars, frequently in the form of miniature sports cars, jeeps, lorries, etc. 

(5) Wheeled toys, propelled by hand levers. 

(6) Other wheeled toys (with no mechanical transmission system) which are designed to 
be drawn or pushed, and are large enough for children to ride. 

(7) Children's cars powered by a motor. 

(B) Dolls' carriages (e.g., strollers), including folding types. 

This group covers doll's carriages, whether or not folding, fitted with two or more wheels, 
such as push-chairs, perambulators, strollers, etc. It also covers bedding for carriages, 
similar to that used for doll's beds. 

(C) Dolls. 

This group includes not only dolls designed for the amusement of children, but also dolls 
intended for decorative purposes (e.g., boudoir dolls, mascot dolls), or for use in Punch and 
Judy or marionette shows, or those of a caricature type. 

Dolls are usually made of rubber, plastics, textile materials, wax, ceramics, wood, 
paperboard, papier mache or combinations of these materials. They may be jointed and 
contain mechanisms which permit limb, head or eye movements as well as reproductions 
of the human voice, etc. They may also be dressed. 

Parts and accessories of dolls of this heading include : heads, bodies, limbs, eyes (other 
than those unmounted of glass, of heading 70.18), moving mechanisms for eyes, 
voice-producing or other mechanisms, wigs, dolls' clothing, shoes and hats. 

XX-9503-1 



95.03 • 
(D) Other toys. 

Thisgroup covers toys intended essentially for the amusement of persons (children or 
adults). However, toys ich, on account of their design, shape or constituent material, are 
identifiable as intended xclusively for animals, e.g., pets, do not fall in this heading, but 
are classified in their ow appropriate heading. This group includes : 

All toys not included in (A) to (C). Many of the toys are mechanically or electrically 
operated. 

These include : 

(i) Toys representi g animals or non-human creatures even if possessing 
predominantly uman physical characteristics (e.g., angels, robots, devils, 
monsters), inclu 'ng those for use in marionette shows. 

(ii) Toy pistols and ns. 

(iii)  Constructional toisf (construction sets, building blocks, etc.). 

(iv)  Toy vehicles (o her than those of group A), trains (whether or not electric), 
aircraft, boats, et ., and their accessories (e.g., railway tracks, signals). 

(v) Toys designed to be ridden by children but not mounted on wheels, e.g., rocking 
horses. 

(vi) Non-electric toy otors, toy steam engines, etc. 

(vii) Toy balloons and toy kites. 

(viii) Tin soldiers and the like, and toy armaments. 

(ix)  Toy sports equipMent, whether or not in sets (e.g., golf sets, tennis sets, archery 
sets, billiard sets; baseball bats, cricket bats, hockey sticks). 

(x)  Toy tools and implements; children's wheelbarrows. 

(xi)  Toy cinematogra hs, magic lanterns, etc.; toy spectacles. 

(xii)  Toy musical inst ments (pianos, trumpets, drums, gramophones, mouth organs, 
accordions, xylophones, musical boxes, etc.). 

Dolls' houses and furniture, including bedding. 

Dolls' tea and coffee sets; toy shops and the like, farmyard sets, etc. 

Toy counting frames (abaci). 

Toy sewing machines. 

Toy clocks and watches. 

(xviii) Educational toys ( .g., toy chemistry, printing, sewing and knitting sets). 

(xix) Hoops, skipping ropes, diabolo spools and sticks, spinning and humming tops, 
balls (other than those of heading 95.04 or 95.06). 

XX-9503-2 



• 95.03 

(xx) Books or sheets consisting essentially of pictures, toys or models, for cutting out 
and assembly; also books containing "stand-up" or movable figures provided they 
have the essential character of toys (see the Explanatory Note to heading 49.03). 

(xxi) Toy marbles (e.g., veined glass marbles put up in any form, or glass balls of any 
kind put up in packets for the amusement of children). 

(xxii) Toy money boxes; babies' rattles, jack-in-the-boxes; toy theatres with or without 
figures, etc. 

(xxiii) Play tents for use by children indoors or outdoors. 

Certain of the above articles (toy arms, tools, gardening sets, tin soldiers, etc.) are often put 
up in sets. 

Certain toys (e.g., electric irons, sewing machines, musical instruments, etc.) may be 
capable of a limited "use"; but they are generally distinguishable by their size and limited 
capacity from real sewing machines, etc. 

(E) Reduced-size ("scale") models and similar recreational models. 

This includes models of a kind mainly used for recreational purposes, for example, 
working or scale models of boats, aircraft, trains, vehicles, etc., and kits of materials and 
parts for making such models, other than sets having the character of competitive games 
of heading 95.04 (e.g., sets comprising slot-racing motor cars with their track layout). 

This group also includes life-size or enlarged reproductions of articles provided they are 
for recreational purposes 

(F) Puzzles of all kinds. 
O 

0 0 

Collections of articles, the individual items of which if presented separately would be classified 
in other headings in the Nomenclature, are classified in this heading when they are put up in a 
form clearly indicating their use as toys (e.g., instructional toys such as chemistry, sewing, etc., 
sets). 

Also, as provided by Note 4 to this Chapter, subject to Note 1 to this Chapter, this heading 
includes articles of the heading combined with one or more items which would be classified in 
other headings if presented separately, provided that : 

(a) the combined items are put up together for retail sale, but the combination cannot be 
considered as a set under the terms of General Interpretative Rule 3 (b); and 

(b) the combination has the essential character of toys. Such combinations generally consist 
of an article of this heading and one or more items of minor importance (e.g., small 
promotional articles or small amounts of confectionery). 

XX-9503-3 



95.03 • 
PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 

This heading also covers identifiable parts and accessories of the articles of this heading, which 
are suitable for use solely or principally therewith and provided they are not articles excluded 
by Note 1 to this Chapter. Such parts and accessories include : 

(1) Musical box movements which, by their form, constituent material and simple design, 
could not be used in muscal boxes of heading 92.08. 

(2) Miniature internal coml ustion piston engines and other engines (other than electric 
motors of heading 85.01 for example, for model aircraft, ships, which are characterised, 
inter alia, by small cylinder capacity and power rating, low weight and small size. 

This heading also excludes : 

(a) Paints put up for children's use (heading 32.13). 

(b) Modelling pastes put up for children's amusement (heading 34.07). 

(c) Children's picture, drawing or colouring books of heading 49.03. 

(d) Transfers (heading 49.08). • 
(e) Bells (including bells for trickles or for other wheeled toys), gongs or the like, of heading 83.06. 

(f) Musical boxes which have a iioll figure attached (heading 92.08). 

(g) Card games (heading 95.04). 

(h) Paper hats, "blow-outs", masks, false noses and the like (heading 95.05). 

(ij) Crayons and pastels for children's use, of heading 96.09. 

(k) Slates and blackboards, of h+ding 96.10. 

(1) Lay figures and automata of a kind used for shop window dressing (heading 96.18). 

(m) Jump balls with one or more iiandles designed for physical exercises. 

• 

• 
XX-9503-4 



• 95.04 

95.04 - Video game consoles and machines, articles for funfair, table or parlour games, 
including pintables, billiards, special tables for casino games and automatic bowling 
alley equipment (+). 
9504.20 - Articles and accessories for billiards of all kinds 

9504.30 - Other games, operated by coins, banknotes, bank cards, tokens or by any 
other means of payment, other than automatic bowling alley equipment 

9504.40 - Playing cards 

9504.50 - Video game consoles and machines, other than those of subheading 9504.30 

9504.90 - Other 

This heading includes : 

(1) Billiard tables of various types (with or without legs), and accessories therefor (e.g., 
billiard cues, cue rests, balls, billiard chalks, ball or slide type markers). But the heading 
excludes mechanical counters (roller-type and the like) (heading 90.29), meters which 
employ a clock movement to indicate the time in play or the amount payable based on that 
time (heading 91.06), and billiard-cue racks (classified in heading 94.03 or according to 
their constituent material). 

(2) Video game consoles and machines as defined in Subheading Note 1 to this Chapter. 

Video game consoles and machines whose objective characteristics and principal function 
are such that they are intended for entertainment purposes (game-playing) remain 
classified in this heading, whether or not they fulfil the conditions of Note 5 (A) to 
Chapter 84 regarding automatic data processing machines. 

The heading also includes parts and accessories of video game consoles and machines (for 
example cases, game cartridges, game controllers, steering wheels), provided they fulfil the 
conditions of Note 3 to this Chapter. 

However, the heading excludes : 

(a) Optional peripherals (keyboards, mouses, disk storage units, etc.) which fulfil the conditions of 
Note 5 (C) to Chapter 84 (Section XVI). 

(b) Optical discs recorded with game software and used solely with a game machine of this heading 
(heading 85.23). 

(3) Tables of the furniture type specially constructed for games (e.g., tables with a 
draught-board top). 

(4) Special tables for casino or parlour games (e.g., for roulette or for miniature horse races); 
croupiers' rakes, etc. 

(5) Table football or similar games. 

XX-9504-1 



95.04 • 
(6) Machines, operated by c ins, banknotes, bank cards, tokens or by other means of payment, 

of the kind used in amu ement arcades, cafés, funfairs, etc., for games of skill or chance 
(e.g., machines for revolver practice, pintables of various types). 

(7) Automatic bowling alley equipment, whether or not equipped with motors and 
electro-mechanical features. 

For the purpose of this h ading the expression "automatic bowling alley equipment" applies 
not only to equipment w ere the pins are arranged in triangular form but also to other types 
(e.g., those in which the pins are arranged in a square). 

(8) Skittles and indoor croq t requisites. 

(9) Sets comprising slot-rac g motor cars with their track layouts, having the character of 
competitive games. 

(10) Dartboards and darts. 

(11) Card games of all kinds (ridge, tarot, "lexicon", etc.). 

(12) Boards and pieces (chemen, draughtsmen, etc.) for games of chess, draughts, dominoes, 
mah-jong, halma, ludo, sakes and ladders, etc. • 

(13) Certain other accessories common to a number of games of this heading, for example, dice, 
dice boxes, counters, suit indicators, specially designed playing cloths (e.g., for roulette). 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Lottery tickets, "scratch card , raffle tickets and tombola tickets (generally heading 49.11). 

(b) Card tables of Chapter 94. 

(c) Seats which incorporate a rind system and are suitable for use with video game consoles and 
machines, television or satel ite receivers, as well as with DVD, music CD, MP3 or video cassette 
players (heading 94.01). 

(d) Puzzles (heading 95.03). 
0 

0 0 

Subheading Explanatory Note. 

Subheading 9504.50. 

This subheading does not cover video game consoles or machines operated by coins, banknotes, bank • 
cards, tokens or by any other means of payment; these are to be classified in subheading 9504.30. 

• 
XX-9504-2 



• 95.05 

95.05 - Festive, carnival or other entertainment articles, including conjuring tricks and 
novelty jokes. 

9505.10 - Articles for Christmas festivities 

9505.90 - Other 

This heading covers : 

(A) Festive, carnival or other entertainment articles, which in view of their intended use are 
generally made of non-durable material. They include : 

(1) Festive decorations used to decorate rooms, tables, etc. (such as garlands, lanterns, 
etc.); decorative articles for Christmas trees (tinsel, coloured balls, animals and other 
figures, etc); cake decorations which are traditionally associated with a particular 
festival (e.g., animals, flags). 

(2) Articles traditionally used at Christmas festivities, e.g., artificial Christmas trees, 
nativity scenes, nativity figures and animals, angels, Christmas crackers, Christmas 
stockings, imitation yule logs, Father Christmases. 

• (3) Articles of fancy dress, e.g., masks, false ears and noses, wigs, false beards and 
moustaches (not being articles of postiche - heading 67.04), and paper hats. However, 
the heading excludes fancy dress of textile materials, of Chapter 61 or 62. 

(4) Throw-balls of paper or cotton-wool, paper streamers (carnival tape), cardboard 
trumpets, "blow-outs", confetti, carnival umbrellas, etc. 

The heading excludes statuettes, statues and the like of a kind used for decorating places of 
worship. 

The heading also excludes articles that contain a festive design, decoration, emblem or motif and 
have a utilitarian function, e.g., tableware, kitchenware, toilet articles, carpets and other textile floor 
coverings, apparel, bed linen, table linen, toilet linen, kitchen linen. 

(B) Conjuring tricks and novelty jokes, e.g., packs of cards, tables, screens and containers, 
specially designed for the performance of conjuring tricks; novelty jokes such as sneezing 
powder, surprise sweets, water-jet button-holes and "Japanese flowers". 

This heading also excludes : 

(a) Natural Christmas trees (Chapter 6). 

(b) Candles (heading 34.06). 

• (c) Packagings of plastics or of paper, used during festivals (classified according to constituent material, 
for example, Chapter 39 or 48) 

(d) Christmas tree stands (classified according to constituent material). 

(e) Textile flags or bunting of heading 63.07. 

(f) Electric garlands of all kinds (heading 94.05). 

• 
XX-9505-1 



95.06 • 
95.06 - Articles and equipment for general physical exercise, gymnastics, athletics, other 

sports (including ;tb le- tennis) or outdoor games, not specified or included 
elsewhere in this Ch pter; swimming pools and paddling pools. 

- Snow-skis and other snow-ski equipment : 

9506.11 - - Skis 

9506.12 - - Ski-fast4iings (ski-bindings) 

9506.19 - - Other 

- Water-skis surf-boards, sailboards and other water-sport equipment : 

9506.21 - - Sailboards 

9506.29 - - Other 

- Golf clubs and other golf equipment : 

9506.31 - - Clubs, complete 

9506.32 - - Balls • 
9506.39 - - Other 

9506.40 - Articles anti equipment for table-tennis 

- Tennis, ba inton or similar rackets, whether or not strung : 

9506.51 - - Lawn-tennis rackets, whether or not strung 

9506.59 - - Other 

- Balls, othe than golf balls and table-tennis balls : 

9506.61 - - Lawn-ten is balls 

9506.62 - - Inflatable 

9506.69 - - Other jn 

9506.70 - Ice skates d roller skates, including skating boots with skates attached 

- Other : • 
9506.91 - - Articles kind equipment for general physical exercise, gymnastics or 

athletics  

9506.99 - - Other 

• 
XX-9506-1 



• 95.06 

This heading covers : 

(A) Articles and equipment for general physical exercise, gymnastics or athletics, e.g. : 

Trapeze bars and rings; horizontal and parallel bars; balance beams, vaulting horses; 
pommel horses; spring boards; climbing ropes and ladders; wall bars; Indian clubs; dumb 
bells and bar bells; medicine balls; jump balls with one or more handles designed for 
physical exercises; rowing, cycling and other exercising apparatus; chest expanders; hand 
grips; starting blocks; hurdles; jumping stands and standards; vaulting poles; landing pit 
pads; javelins, discuses, throwing hammers and putting shots; punch balls (speed bags) and 
punch bags (punching bags); boxing or wrestling rings; assault course climbing walls. 

(B) Requisites for other sports and outdoor games (other than toys presented in sets, or 
separately, of heading 95.03), e.g. : 

(1) Snow-skis and other snow-ski equipment, (e.g., ski-fastenings (ski-bindings), ski 
brakes, ski poles). 

• (2) Water-skis, surf-boards, sailboards and other water-sport equipment, such as diving 
stages (platforms), chutes, divers' flippers and respiratory masks of a kind used 
without oxygen or compressed air bottles, and simple underwater breathing tubes 
(generally known as "snorkels") for swimmers or divers. 

(3) Golf clubs and other golf equipment, such as golf balls, golf tees. 

(4) Articles and equipment for table-tennis (ping-pong), such as tables (with or without 
legs), bats (paddles), balls and nets. 

(5) Tennis, badminton or similar rackets (e.g., squash rackets), whether or not strung. 

(6) Balls, other than golf balls and table-tennis balls, such as tennis balls, footballs, 
rugby balls and similar balls (including bladders and covers for such balls); water 
polo, basketball and similar valve type balls; cricket balls. 

(7) Ice skates and roller skates, including skating boots with skates attached. 

(8) Sticks and bats for hockey, cricket, lacrosse, etc.; chistera (jai alai scoops); pucks for 
ice hockey; curling stones. 

(9) Nets for various games (tennis, badminton, volleyball, football, basketball, etc.). 

(10) Fencing equipment : fencing foils, sabres and rapiers and their parts (e.g., blades, 
guards, hilts and buttons or stops), etc. 

(11) Archery equipment, such as bows, arrows and targets. 

(12) Equipment of a kind used in children's playgrounds (e.g., swings, slides, see-saws 
and giant strides). 

(13) Protective equipment for sports or games, e.g., fencing masks and breast plates, 
elbow and knee pads, cricket pads, shin-guards, ice hockey pants with built-in 
guards and pads. 

(14) Other articles and equipment, such as requisites for deck tennis, quoits or bowls; 
skate boards; racket presses; mallets for polo or croquet; boomerangs; ice axes; clay 
pigeons and clay pigeon projectors; bobsleighs (bobsleds), luges and similar 
non-motorised vehicles for sliding on snow or ice. 

(C) Swimming pools and paddling pools. 

• 
XX-9506-2 



95.06 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Strings for lawn tennis and other rackets (Chapter 39, heading 42.06 or Section XI). 

(b) Sports bags and other containers of heading 42.02, 43.03 or 43.04. 

(c) Sports gloves, mittens and mitts (generally heading 42.03). 

(d) Enclosure nets, and net ca ing-bags for footballs, tennis balls, etc. (generally heading 56.08). 

(e) Sports clothing of textiles, of Chapter 61 or 62, whether or not incorporating incidentally protective 
components such as pads or padding in the elbow, knee or groin areas (e.g., fencing clothing or 
soccer goalkeeper jerseys). 

(f) Sails for boats, sailboards or landcraft, of heading 63.06. 

(g) Sports footwear (other thai ice or roller skating boots with skates attached) of Chapter 64 and 
sports headgear of Chapter 5. 

(h) Walking-sticks, whips, riding-crops and the like (heading 66.02), and parts thereof (heading 66.03). 

(ij) Sports craft (such as marinejets, canoes and skiffs) and sports vehicles (other than bobsleighs 
(bobsleds), toboggans and t e like), of Section XVII. • 

(k) Frogmen's and other goggle (heading 90.04). 

(1) Electro-medical apparatus and other instruments and appliances of heading 90.18. 

(m) Mechano-therapy appliances (heading 90.19). 

(n) Breathing appliances of a1• d u sed with oxygen or compressed air bottles (heading 90.20). 

(o) Articles for sports purposes f Chapter 91. 
1 

(p) Bowling requisites of all ki;I ds (including automatic bowling alley equipment) and other equipment 
for parlour, table or funfair ames (heading 95.04). 

• 
XX-9506-3 



• 95.07 

95.07 - Fishing rods, fish-hooks and other line fishing tackle; fish landing nets, butterfly nets 
and similar nets; decoy "birds" (other than those of heading 92.08 or 97.05) and 
similar hunting or shooting requisites. 

9507.10 - Fishing rods 

9507.20 - Fish-hooks, whether or not snelled 

9507.30 - Fishing reels 

9507.90 - Other 

This heading covers : 

(1) Fish-hooks of all kinds (e.g., with single or multiple barbs) and sizes. These are usually 
made of steel but they may be bronzed, tinned, silvered or gilded. 

(2) Fish landing nets, butterfly nets and similar nets. These usually consist of pocket-like 
nets of textile yarn or cord, mounted on a wire support and fixed to a handle. 

• (3) Line fishing rods and tackle. Fishing rods may be of various sizes, and may be made of 
various materials (bamboo, wood, metal, glass fibre, plastics, etc.). They may consist of a 
single piece or be jointed. Fishing tackle comprises such items as reels and reel mountings; 
artificial bait 	imitation fish, flies, insects or worms) and hooks mounted with such 
bait; spinning bait; mounted lines and casts; fishing floats (cork, glass, quill, etc.) including 
luminous floats; line winding frames; automatic striking devices; mounted fishing rings 
(other than mounted rings of precious or semi-precious stone); sinkers, and fishing rod 
bells when mounted or attached to external clamps, clips or other devices. 

(4) Certain hunting or shooting requisites such as decoy "birds" (but not including decoy 
calls of all kinds (heading 92.08) or stuffed birds of heading 97.05) and lark mirrors. 

This heading also excludes : 
(a) Feathers for making artificial flies (heading 05.05 or 67.01). 
(b) Yams, monofilaments, cords, and real or imitation gut, cut to length but not made up into fishing 

lines (Chapter 39, heading 42.06 or Section XI). 
(c) Sports bags and other containers (e.g., fishing rod cases and game bags) of heading 42.02, 43.03 

or 43.04. 

• (d) Unmounted rings (classified in their own appropriate headings). 
(e) Traps, snares, etc. (classified according to constituent materials). 
(0 Bells, non-electric, of base metal, for fishing tackle, not mounted or attached to external clamps, 

clips, or other devices (heading 83.06). 
(g) Clay pigeons (heading 95.06). 

• 
XX-9507-1 



95.08 

95.08 - Roundabouts, swings, shooting galleries and other fairground amusements; 
travelling circuses and travelling menageries; travelling theatres. 
9508.10 - Travelling circuses and travelling menageries 

9508.90 - Other 

Fairground amusements, travelling circuses, travelling menageries and travelling theatres fall in 
this heading provided they comprise all the essential units required for their normal operation. 
The heading also includes items of auxiliary equipment provided they are presented with, and 
as components of, these variOus amusements, notwithstanding that when presented separately 
such items (e.g., tents, animals, musical instruments, power plants, motors, lighting fittings, 
seats, and arms and ammunition) would fall in other headings of the Nomenclature. 

Subject to the provisions of Note 1 to this Chapter, articles which are identifiable as designed 
solely or principally for use a parts and accessories of such amusements (e.g., boats for swings 
and water-chutes), remain clasified here when presented separately. 

Fairground amusements falling in this heading include : 

(1) Roundabouts of all kinds 

(2) "Dodge'em" car installat ons. 

(3) Water-chutes. 

(4) Scenic railways and slid7. 

(5) Swinging boats. 

(6) Shooting galleries and coonut shies. 

(7) Mazes. 

(8) Freak shows. 

(9) Lotteries (e.g., wheels of fortune). 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Travelling stalls for the sale ,of goods (confectionery and other products, etc.), for advertising or for 
educational or similar exhibitions. 

(b) Tractors and other transport vehicles, including trailers, other than those specially designed for and 
forming part of fairground amusements (e.g., nng-stand trailers). 

(c) Amusement machines operaled by coins, banknotes (paper currency), discs or other similar articles. 
(heading 95.04). 

(d) Goods for distribution as pri 

XX-9508-1 



• 96 

Chapter 96 

Miscellaneous manufactured articles 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Pencils for cosmetic or toilet uses (Chapter 33); 

(b) Articles of Chapter 66 (for example, parts of umbrellas or walking-sticks); 

(c) Imitation jewellery (heading 71.17); 

(d) Parts of general use, as defined in Note 2 to Section XV, of base metal (Section XV), or similar 
goods of plastics (Chapter 39); 

(e) Cutlery or other articles of Chapter 82 with handles or other parts of carving or moulding 
materials; heading 96.01 or 96.02 applies, however, to separately presented handles or other 
parts of such articles; 

(1) Articles of Chapter 90 (for example, spectacle frames (heading 90.03), mathematical drawing 
pens (heading 90.17), brushes of a kind specialised for use in dentistry or for medical, surgical or 
veterinary purposes (heading 90.18)); 

(g) Articles of Chapter 91 (for example, clock or watch cases); 

(h) Musical instruments or parts or accessories thereof (Chapter 92); 

(ij) Articles of Chapter 93 (arms and parts thereof); 

(k) Articles of Chapter 94 (for example, furniture, lamps and lighting fittings); 

(1) Articles of Chapter 95 (toys, games, sports requisites); or 

(m) Works of art, collectors' pieces or antiques (Chapter 97). 

2.- In heading 96.02 the expression "vegetable or mineral carving material" means : 

(a) Hard seeds, pips, hulls and nuts and similar vegetable materials of a kind used for carving (for 
example, corozo and dom); 

(b) Amber, meerschaum, agglomerated amber and agglomerated meerschaum, jet and mineral 
substitutes for jet. 

3.- In heading 96.03 the expression "prepared knots and tufts for broom or brush making" applies only to 
unmounted knots and tufts of animal hair, vegetable fibre or other material, which are ready for 
incorporation without division in brooms or brushes, or which require only such further minor 
processes as trimming to shape at the top, to render them ready for such incorporation. 

4.- Articles of this Chapter, other than those of headings 96.01 to 96.06 or 96.15, remain classified in the 
Chapter whether or not composed wholly or partly of precious metal or metal clad with precious 
metal, of natural or cultured pearls, or precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or 
reconstructed). However, headings 96.01 to 96.06 and 96.15 include articles in which natural or 
cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed), precious metal 
or metal clad with precious metal constitute only minor constituents. 

• 
XX-96-1 



96 • 
GENERAL 

This Chapter covers carving and moulding materials and articles of these materials, certain 
brooms, brushes and sieves, certain articles of haberdashery, certain articles of writing and 
office equipment, certain requ'sites for smokers, certain toilet articles, certain sanitary absorbent 
products (sanitary towels (pa s) and tampons, napkins and napkin liners for babies and similar 
articles, of any material) an various other articles not more specifically covered by other 
headings in the Nomenclature 

The articles described in headings 96.07 to 96.14 and 96.16 to 96.18 may be made wholly or 
partly of natural or cultured pearls, of precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or 
reconstructed), or of precious metal or metal clad with precious metal. However, the articles 
described in headings 96.01 to 96.06 and 96.15 may incorporate those materials as minor 
constituents only. 

XX-96-2 



• 96.01 

96.01 - Worked ivory, bone, tortoise-shell, horn, antlers, coral, mother-of-pearl and other 
animal carving material, and articles of these materials (including articles obtained 
by moulding). 

9601.10 - Worked ivory and articles of ivory 

9601.90 - Other 

This heading relates to worked animal materials (other than those referred to in 
heading 96.02). These materials are mainly worked by carving or cutting. Most of them may 
also be moulded. 

For the purposes of this heading, the expression "worked" refers to materials which have 
undergone processes extending beyond the simple preparations permitted in the heading for the 
raw material in question (see the Explanatory Notes to headings 05.05 to 05.08). The heading 
therefore covers pieces of ivory, bone, tortoise-shell, horn, antlers, coral, mother-of-pearl, etc., 
in the form of sheets, plates, rods, etc., cut to shape (including square or rectangular) or polished 
or otherwise worked by grinding, drilling, milling, turning, etc. However, pieces which are 

• identifiable as parts of articles are excluded from this heading if such parts are covered by 
another heading of the Nomenclature. Thus, piano-key .plates and plates for insertion in butts of 
firearms fall in headings 92.09 and 93.05 respectively. However, worked materials not 
identifiable as parts of articles remain classified in this heading (e.g., simple discs, plates or 
strips for inlaying, etc., or for subsequent use in the manufacture of piano-keys). 

Provided they are worked or in the form of articles, the heading includes the following : 

(I) Ivory. Throughout the Nomenclature, elephant, hippopotamus, walrus, narwhal and wild 
boar tusks, rhinoceros horns and the teeth of all animals are regarded as ivory (see Note 3 
to Chapter 5). 

(II) Bone, the hard solid parts of the bodies of many animals, worked almost solely by 
cutting. 

(III) Tortoise-shell, obtained almost exclusively from turtles. Tortoise-shell, which is 
yellowish, brownish or black in colour, is very malleable and becomes highly ductile 
when heated; when cooled it retains the shape given to it. 

(IV) Horn and antlers, obtained from the foreheads of ruminants. (Horn-cores are not used as 
carving or moulding materials but almost exclusively in the manufacture of gelatin.) 

(V) Natural coral (i.e., the calcareous skeletons of marine polyps) and agglomerated coral. 

(VI) Mother-of-pearl, the lustrous, iridescent nacreous lining of certain shells; its surface 
appears to be undulated although, in fact, it is perfectly smooth. 

(VII) Hooves, nails, claws and beaks. 

(VIII) Bone and similar materials obtained from marine mammals. 

(IX) Quills of feathers. 

(X) Shells of crustaceans and molluscs. 

• 
XX-9601-1 



96.01 • 
The heading covers : 

(A) Worked animal carvin a materials. 

The carving materials mentioned in the heading are classified here provided they have 
undergone processes extending beyond cleaning or scraping, simple sawing to remove 
useless parts, cutting (so etimes followed by rough planing) and, in some cases, bleaching, 
flattening, trimming or s lifting. 

Thus, tortoise-shell is exclu ed if it has not undergone processes extending beyond the straightening 
and surface-levelling of scales (this last operation is exceptional since unworked tortoise-shell is 
almost always presented in sheets of uneven thickness and with curved surfaces) (see the 
Explanatory Note to heading 05.07, Part (B)). The heading similarly excludes coral from which 
only the outer crust has beeii removed (heading 05.08). 

Also included are moulded products, of any shape, made from tortoise-shell scales, plates 
or claws, or from reconstituted materials obtained from powder or waste of any of the 
carving materials of the beading. 

One of the properties of tortoise-shell is that it can be joined together by heating without 
the use of any special binder; advantage is taken of this property to obtain comparatively 
thick plates by uniting th n scales in layers, and to make articles. A characteristic of horn is 
that it becomes soft w en heated and can then be flattened or reduced to a pasty • 
consistency; it can, there ore, be worked by moulding in the same manner as tortoise-shell. 

Polished or unpolished discs not having the character of button blanks (see the Explanatory 
Note to heading 96.06) and Jerusalem pearls, (i.e., irregular mother-of-pearl beads, simply 
pierced, but not polished, graded or further worked) remain classified in this heading even 
if temporarily strung. 

(B) Articles of animal carving materials of the heading. 

This group includes : 

(1) Cigar or cigarette cases, snuff-boxes, powder-boxes, buckles, clasps, lipstick cases. 

(2) Handles or mountings for brushes, presented separately. 

(3) Boxes of various kbids, cachou boxes, protective covers for watches. 

(4) Handles for tools, knives, forks, razors, etc., of Chapter 82, presented separately. 

(5) Paper-knives, letter-openers, book-markers. 

(6) Frames for pictures, paintings, etc. 

(7) Book-covers. 

(8) Articles of religio use. 

(9) Crochet hooks and knitting needles. 

• 
XX-9601-2 



• 96.01 

(10) Small ornamental articles (e.g., trinkets, carved articles other than those of 
heading 97.03). 

(11) Shoe horns. 

(12) Tableware such as knife-rests, small spoons and serviette rings. 

(13) Ornamental mounted horns and antlers (trophies, etc.). 

(14) Cameos and intaglios other than those constituting articles of jewellery. 

The heading also includes articles made from special shells, and articles (e.g., tooth-picks 
and special tips for cigars) made from quills of feathers. However, the heading excludes 
quills simply cut to length and not further worked (heading 05.05) and quills prepared for 
use as fishing floats (heading 95.07). 

Articles overlaid or inlaid with animal carving materials are classified in this heading, 
provided the overlaying or inlaying forms the main characteristic of the finished article. 

• This may be so in the case of wooden boxes, caskets, etc., overlaid or inlaid with, e.g., 
ivory, bone, tortoise-shell or horn. 

This heading also excludes : 

(a) Articles of Chapter 66 (e.g., parts of umbrellas, sunshades, walking-sticks, etc., for example, 
handles, stems and tips). 

(b) Framed glass minors (heading 70.09). 

(c) Articles of animal carving materials, composed partly of precious metal or metal clad with precious 
metal, or of natural or cultured pearls, or precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or 
reconstructed) (Chapter 71). Nevertheless such articles remain classified in this heading when the 
natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones (natural synthetic or reconstructed), 
precious metal or metal clad with precious metal constitute only minor constituents (e.g., 
monograms, initials, ferrules, rims, etc.). 

(d) Articles of imitation jewellery (heading 71.17). 

(e) Cutlery or other articles of Chapter 82 with handles or other parts of carving or moulding materials; 
however, such handles and other parts, when presented separately, remain classified in this 
heading. 

(f) Articles of Chapter 90 (e.g., binoculars; also frames and mountings, and parts of frames and 
mountings, for spectacles, pince-nez, lorgnettes, goggles and the like). 

(g) Articles of Chapter 91 (e.g., watch and clock cases). Protective covers for watches remain, 
however, classified in this heading. 

(h) Articles of Chapter 92, e.g., musical instruments and parts thereof (hunting horns, piano or 
accordion keys, pegs, bridges, etc.). 

(ij) Articles of Chapter 93 (e.g., parts of arms). 

(k) Articles of Chapter 94 (e.g., furniture, lamp and lighting fittings). 

(1) Articles of Chapter 95 (toys, games, sports requisites). 

(m) Articles of headings 96.03 (e.g., brooms and brushes) and 96.04. Brush handles or mountings, when 
presented separately remain, however, classified in this heading. 

• 
XX-9601-3 



96.01 • 
(n) Articles of headings 96.05, 96.06, 96.08, 96.11 or 96.13 to 96.16 (e.g., buttons and button blanks; 

fountain pens, pen-holders, etc.; smoking pipes, and pipe bowls, stems and other parts of pipes; cigar 
and cigarette holders and parts thereof; combs). 

(o) Articles of Chapter 97 (e.g., original sculptures and statuary; collectors' pieces of zoological 
interest). 

• 

• 

• 
XX-9601-4 



• 96.02 

96.02 - Worked vegetable or mineral carving material and articles of these materials; 
moulded or carved articles of wax, of stearin, of natural gums or natural resins or of 
modelling pastes, and other moulded or carved articles, not elsewhere specified or 
included; worked, unhardened gelatin (except gelatin of heading 35.03) and articles 
of unhardened gelatin. 

For the definition of the term "worked", the second paragraph of the Explanatory Note to 
heading 96.01 applies, mutatis mutandis, to this heading (see also the Explanatory Notes to 
headings 14.04, 15.21, 25.30, 27.14, 34.04, 34.07, 35.03, for example). 

(I) WORKED VEGETABLE OR MINERAL CARVING MATERIAL 
AND ARTICLES OF THESE MATERIALS 

(A) Worked vegetable carving materials. 

This group covers worked vegetable carving materials of the kind mentioned in Note 2 (a) 

• to this Chapter. These include corozo (also known as "vegetable ivory"), the nuts of the 
dom palm and similar nuts of other palms (Tahiti, Palmyra, etc.), coconut shell, seeds of 
the Canna indica variety of reed (Indian shot), seeds of the Abrus precatorius (or bead 
tree), date stones, olive stones, the seeds of the piassava palm and locust beans. 

It also covers articles produced by moulding powders of vegetable carving materials. 

(B) Worked mineral carving materials. 

This group covers mineral carving materials of the kind mentioned in Note 2 (b) to this 
Chapter. 

The heading does not cover the following products which fall in heading 25.30 : 

(i) Rough blocks or lumps of meerschaum or amber; 

(ii) Agglomerated meerschaum and agglomerated amber obtained from waste of natural 
meerschaum and amber scrap by agglomerating or moulding, in the form of plates, rods, sticks 
and similar shapes, not worked after moulding. 

(C) Articles of vegetable or mineral carving materials. 

Subject to the exclusions set out below, this group includes articles of vegetable or mineral 
carving materials, such as : 

• (i) Small ornaments (e.g., statuettes). 

(ii) Small articles such as boxes and caskets. 

(iii) Discs, whether or not polished (other than button blanks, see the Explanatory Note 
to heading 96.06). 

• 
XX-9602-1 



96.02 • 
(II) MOULDED 0 CARVED ARTICLES OF WAX, OF STEARIN, 

OF NATURAL GUMS NATURAL RESINS OR OF MODELLING PASTES, 
AND OTHER MOUL ED OR CARVED ARTICLES, NOT ELSEWHERE 
SPECIFIED OR INCLUDED; WORKED, UNHARDENED GELATIN AND 

ARTI LES OF UNHARDENED GELATIN 

This group includes, on the one hand, moulded and carved articles of various materials, 
provided those articles are n t specified or included in other headings of the Nomenclature 
(e.g., articles of plastics - C apter 39, or of ebonite - Chapter 40). It also covers worked 
unhardened gelatin and arti les thereof (other than goods of heading 35.03 or Chapter 49). 

For the purposes of these m erials, the expression "moulded articles" means articles which 
have been moulded to a shap appropriate to their intended use. On the other hand, materials 
moulded in the shape of blo ks, cubes, plates, bars, sticks, etc., whether or not impressed 
during moulding, are not incl ded. 

Subject to the exclusions men ioned below, this group includes : 

(1) Moulded or carved articl s of wax : 

(i) Artificial honeycombs. 

(ii) Moulding shapes for electroplating. 

(iii) Imitation flowers, f liage or fruit, moulded in one piece, or assembled otherwise than 
by the processes (e g., binding, glueing or similar methods) which make the goods 
classifiable in head ng 67.02. 

(iv) Busts, heads, figur s or statuettes (other than articles of a kind used as tailors' 
dummies - see the xplanatory Note to heading 96.18, and original sculptures and 
statuary - see headi g 97.03). 

(v) Wax pearls. 

(vi) T-shaped tubes ma e from a preparation based on wax, and used in certain surgical 
operations. 

(vii) Imitation sweets, b rs of chocolate and other imitation articles made of wax for 
window dressing. 

(viii) Earplugs of wax on cotton wool support. 

(ix) Strips of wax enclo ed in textile material used to fill in the gaps in wooden foundry 
shapes. 

(2) Moulded or carved article, of paraffin wax (especially containers for hydrofluoric acid). 

(3) Moulded or carved article of stearin. 

(4) Moulded or carved article of rosin (e.g., rosin for violin bows). 

(5) Moulded or carved article of copal (usually imitations of articles of amber). 

(6) Moulded or carved articl :s of modelling wax (e.g., flowers or plants moulded in one piece, 
figures, statuettes and sim lar ornaments). 

XX-9602-2 



• 96.02 

(7) Moulded or carved articles made with a basis of flour or starch, agglomerated with gum 
and lacquered (imitation flowers or fruit, moulded in one piece, statuettes, etc.). 

(8) Sheets of unhardened gelatin cut to shape other than square or rectangular. Sheets cut to 
rectangular (including square) shape, whether or not surface worked, fall in heading 35.03 
or in Chapter 49 (e.g., postcards) (see the Explanatory Note to heading 35.03). Articles of 
unhardened gelatin include, for example : 

(i) Small discs for sticking billiard cue tips. 

(ii) Capsules for pharmaceutical products and for mechanical lighter fuel. 

* * 

Articles overlaid or inlaid with vegetable or mineral carving materials or with moulding 
materials are classified in this heading, provided the overlaying or inlaying forms the main 
characteristic of the finished article. This may be so in the case of wooden boxes, caskets, etc., 

• overlaid or inlaid with materials described in this heading. 
* 

* * 

The provisions of the Explanatory Note to heading 96.01 as regards the products excluded from 
that heading are also applicable to this heading. 

The heading also excludes : 

(a) Sealing wax, including bottle-sealing wax (heading 32.14 or 34.04). 

(b) Candles, tapers and the like of paraffin or other waxes, stearin, etc. (heading 34.06). 

(c) Modelling pastes, including those put up for children's amusement, and preparations known as 
"dental wax" or as "dental impression compounds", put up in sets, in packings for retail sale or in 
plates, horseshoe shapes, sticks or similar forms (heading 34.07). 

(d) Copying pastes with a basis of gelatin (heading 38.24). 

(e) Moulded articles of peat (heading 68.15). 

(0 Demonstrational models (heading 90.23). 

• 

• 
XX-9602-3 



    

    

   

   

  

  

  

96.03 • 
96.03 Brooms, brushes (in luding brushes constituting parts of machines, appliances or 

vehicles), hand-oper ted mechanical floor sweepers, not motorised, mops and 
feather dusters; pre ared knots and tufts for broom or brush making; paint pads 
and rollers; squeegee (other than roller squeegees). 

9603.10 - Brooms a d brushes, consisting of twigs or other vegetable materials bound 
together, ith or without handles 

- Tooth brushes, shaving brushes, hair brushes, nail brushes, eyelash brushes 
and other toilet brushes for use on the person, including such brushes 
constitutin parts of appliances : 

9603.21 - - Tooth b shes, including dental-plate brushes 

9603.29 - - Other 

9603.30 - Artists' b shes, writing brushes and similar brushes for the application of 
cosmetics 

9603.40 - Paint, dis emper, varnish or similar brushes (other than brushes of 
subheadin 9603.30); paint pads and rollers 

9603.50 - Other bras es constituting parts of machines, appliances or vehicles • 
9603.90 - Other 

(A) BROOMS AND BRUSHES, CONSISTING OF TWIGS 
OR OTHER VE I ETABLE MATERIALS BOUND TOGETHER, 

ITH OR WITHOUT HANDLES 

These are rather roughly mad articles, with or without handles, used mainly for sweeping the 
ground (streets, yards, stables, etc.) or floors (e.g., vehicle floors). They usually consist either of 
a single bundle of vegetable aterial (twigs, straw, etc.) roughly bound together, or of one or 
more bundles of thick straw o reeds forming a core on which thinner and longer straw is fixed 
with textile threads; these text le threads may at the same time form decorative motifs. For use, 
these articles are generally mo nted on a handle. 

This group also includes fly- isks, made in the same way but of lighter materials. 

These brooms and brushes are generally made from birch, hazel, holly, heather or broom twigs, 
sorghum, millet, camelina, tc., straw (or panicles), or fibres of aloe, coco (coir), palm 
(piassava, in particular), etc., r buckwheat stalks. 

(B) 1 THER BROOMS AND BRUSHES • 
This group comprises a varie of articles, differing considerably both in materials and shape, 
used for toilet purposes, fo household cleaning, for applying paints, adhesive or liquid 
products, and for certain indus rial operations (cleaning, polishing, etc.). 

• 
XX-9603-1 



• 96.03 

In general, the brooms and brushes of this group consist either of small tufts or knots of flexible 
or springy fibres or filaments mounted in a broom or brush stock or back, or, as in the case of 
paint brushes, of a bunch of hairs or fibres strongly secured to the end of a short stock or handle 
with or without the aid of a metal ferrule or other retaining device. 

The group also includes brooms and brushes of rubber or plastics moulded in one piece. 

A very wide range of raw materials is used in the manufacture of the above articles. The 
materials used for the tufts, etc., may be : 

(A) Of animal origin : bristles of pig or wild boar; hair of horses, oxen, goats, badgers, martens, 
skunks, squirrels, polecats, etc.; fibres of horn; shafts of feathers. 

(B) Of vegetable origin : couch-grass roots, istle (or Tampico), coco (coir) or piassava fibres, 
esparto grass, sorghum panicles or split bamboo. 

(C) Of man-made filaments (e.g., nylon or viscose rayon). 

• (D) Of wire (steel, brass, bronze, etc.), or of various other materials, e.g., cotton or wool yarn 
or twine, glass fibres. 

The materials used for mountings include : wood, plastics, bone, horn, ivory, tortoise-shell, 
ebonite, certain metals (steel, aluminium, brass, etc.). In some brushes (e.g., circular brushes for 
machines, or brushes for special sweepers) leather, paperboard, felt or woven fabrics are also 
used. Quills of feathers are used as mountings for certain paint brushes. 

Brushes in which natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic 
or reconstructed), precious metal or metal clad with precious metal constitute only minor 
constituents (e.g., monograms or rims) are also included in this group. 

The heading excludes brushes containing natural or cultured pearls, precious or semi-precious stones 
(natural, synthetic or reconstructed), precious metal or metal clad with precious metal otherwise than as 
minor constituents (Chapter 71). 

This group includes : 

(1) Tooth brushes, including dental-plate brushes. 

(2) Shaving brushes. 

(3) Brushes for toilet use (e.g., brushes for the hair, beard, moustache or eyelashes; nail 
brushes; brushes for hair dyeing, etc.); hairdressers' neck brushes. 

(4) Brushes of rubber or plastics, moulded in one piece, for toilet use (washing hands, etc.), for 
cleaning lavatory pans, etc. 

(5) Clothes, hat or shoe brushes; comb-cleaning brushes. 

XX-9603-2 



96.03 • 
(6) Brushes for household use (e.g., scrubbing brushes, dish-washing brushes, sink-cleaning 

brushes, lavatory brushes, furniture brushes, radiator brushes, crumb brushes). 

(7) Brooms and brushes for sweeping roads, floors, etc. 

(8)  Special car cleaning brushes of textile materials, whether or not impregnated with cleaning 
products. 

(9) Brushes for grooming animals (horses, dogs, etc.). 

(10) Brushes for oiling weapons, bicycles, etc. 

(11) Brushes for gramophone records, including those for mounting on the sound-arm to clean 
the record automatically. 

(12) Brushes for cleaning printing type or type-bars of typewriters. 

(13) Brushes for cleaning sparking plugs, files, parts to be welded, etc. 

(14) Brushes for removing moss or old bark from trees or bushes. 

(15) Brushes for stencilling, whether or not with ink reservoir and ink-flow control. • 
(16) Paint and other brushes (round or flat) for plasterers, house painters, decorators, 

cabinet-makers, artists, etc. For example, brushes for washing off old paint-work, 
distempering brushes, paper-hanging brushes, varnishing brushes, etc.; brushes for oil or 
water colours, wash-tinting brushes; brushes for painting ceramics, gilding brushes, etc.; 
small brushes for office use. 

This group also includes : 

(I) Brushes mounted on wire (usually strands of wire twisted together), for example, flue 
brushes; brushes for bott e-washing or for cleaning cylindrical lamp glasses; brushes for 
cleaning tubes and pipin , etc.; cleaners for smoking pipes; cleaning brushes for rifles, 
revolvers or pistols; funn:an d tube brushes for musical instruments, etc. 

(II) Brushes constituting ma hinery parts, for example, for road-sweepers; for spinning or 
weaving machines; for grinding, polishing or other machine-tools; for milling or 
paper-making machines; for watch-makers' or jewellers' lathes; for machines used in the 
leather, fur or shoe-making industries. 

(III) Brushes for electrical household appliances (e.g., floor polishers or waxers, vacuum 
cleaners). 

This heading excludes : 

(a) Brush mountings or handles classified according to the constituent material). 

(b) Textile polishing discs or pads (heading 59.11). 

(c) Card clothing (heading 84.48). 

(d) Diskettes for cleaning disk &ives in ADP machines, etc. (heading 84.73). 

• 
XX-9603-3 



96.03 

(e) Brushes of a kind specialised for use in dentistry or for medical, surgical or veterinary purposes (e.g., 
laryngeal brushes, and brushes for mounting on dental drills) (heading 90.18). 

(f) Brushes having the character of toys (heading 95.03). 

(g) Powder-puffs and pads for the application of cosmetics or toilet preparations (heading 96.16). 

(C) HAND-OPERATED MECHANICAL FLOOR SWEEPERS, 
NOT MOTORISED 

These are simple articles, usually consisting of a wheeled housing containing one or more 
cylindrical brushes operated by the movement of the wheels, propelled manually by means of a 
handle and used in particular for cleaning carpets. 

The heading excludes motorised sweepers (heading 84.79). 

(D) MOPS AND FEATHER DUSTERS 

• Mops consist of a bundle of textile cords or vegetable fibres mounted on a handle. Certain 
other mops consist of a mop-head pad made of textile or other material fitted or attached to a 
frame or other base connected to the handle. They include dust mops, spray mops and sponge 
mops used in dry or wet applications for cleaning up stains or liquid spills, cleaning floors, 
washing dishes, etc. 

Feather dusters consist of a bundle of feathers mounted on a handle and are used for dusting 
furniture, shelves, shop windows, etc. In other types of feather dusters the "feathers" have been 
replaced by lambs' wool, textile materials, etc., fixed to or wrapped around a handle. 

This heading excludes cleaning cloth made of textile materials designed for use as hand cloths or for 
attachment to the mop-head frame or other base, when presented separately (Section XI). 

(E) PREPARED KNOTS AND TUFTS 

In accordance with Note 3 to this Chapter, this group is restricted to unmounted knots or tufts of 
animal hair, vegetable fibre, man-made filaments, etc., which are ready for incorporation 
without division in brooms or brushes, or which require only such further minor processes as 
trimming to shape at the top, to render them ready for such incorporation. 

The heading therefore excludes, inter alia, bundles (or similar trade presentations) of animal hair, 
vegetable fibres or other materials which have not been prepared for broom or brush making. The heading 
also excludes assemblies of hair or fibres which have been prepared for broom or brush making, but 
which still require to be divided into smaller tufts before mounting into broom or brush heads, etc. 

The prepared knots and tufts included in this group are mainly used for shaving brushes, paint 
brushes and painting or drawing brushes. 

• 
XX-9603-4 



96.03 • 
To bind them into a compact bundle, the fibre tufts (or knots) are usually dipped, up to about 
one quarter of their length, in a varnish or some other coating material; sometimes sawdust is 
also added for greater stren th. Knots or tufts mounted in collars (usually of metal) are 
excluded (group (B) above). 

Prepared tufts or knots which leave to undergo other finishing processes after being mounted on 
a handle (rounding their ends, grinding of the fibre ends to give them required softness, etc.) 
remain in this group. 

(F) PAINT PADS AND ROLLERS; SQUEEGEES 
(OTHER THAN ROLLER SQUEEGEES) 

Paint rollers consist of a roller covered with lambskin or other material mounted on a handle. 

Paint pads consist of a flat surface, for example, of woven fabric attached to a hard back, usually 
of plastics; they may have handles. 

Squeegees are generally made of strips of plastics, rubber or felt mounted between two blades of 
wood, metal, etc., or mounted on a block of wood, metal, etc., and used as a broom on wet 
surfaces. 

However, the group excludes roller squeegees, consisting of one or more rollers mounted on a handle and 
used in photography (heading 90 10). 

XX-9603-5 



• 96.04 

96.04 - Hand sieves and hand riddles. 

The expression "hand sieves and hand riddles" applies to articles made of strong gauze or other 
mesh material (of various mesh sizes) mounted in a rectangular or circular frame (generally of 
wood or metal), and used for separating solid substances according to particle size. 

The materials most commonly used for the mesh are horsehair, man-made monofilaments, silk 
yarns, spun gut, wire (steel, iron, brass wire, etc.). 

The heading includes : 

Hand sieves and hand riddles for cinders, sand, seeds, garden mould, etc.; bolting cloth sieves 
(e.g., for flour); household sieves (e.g., for flour); sieves used in laboratories (to test fineness of 
cement, moulding sands, fertilisers, wood flour, etc.), including those which can be connected 
together to form a series; precision sieves for sorting precious or semi-precious stones (e.g., 
diamonds). 

The heading excludes : 

(a) Sieves and riddles in the nature of fixed articles (e.g., screens resting on the ground for sifting earth 
or gravel - generally heading 73.26). 

(b) Simple strainers (e.g., for cheese) consisting of a container with a perforated sheet-metal bottom; 
funnels fitted with a filtering device; milk strainers; strainers for filtering paints, whitewash, 
fungicidal solutions, etc. (generally Chapter 73). 

(c) Sieves and riddles designed to be mounted on machines or appliances (e.g., for the milling industry, 
in agriculture, for screening stones, ores, etc.), such articles being classified as parts of machinery, 
etc., in accordance with Note 2 to Section XVI, generally in the same heading as the machine for 
which they are solely or principally designed (e.g., heading 84.37 or 84.74). 

XX-9604-1 



96.05 • 
96.05 - Travel sets for persotlal toilet, sewing or shoe or clothes cleaning. 

The heading covers certain travel sets consisting of articles individually falling in different 
headings of the Nomenclature or consisting of different articles of the same heading. 

The heading includes : 

(1) Toilet sets, presented in a case of leather, fabric, plastics etc., containing, e.g., moulded 
plastic boxes, brushes, a comb, scissors, tweezers, a nail file, a mirror, a razor holder and 
manicure instruments. 

(2) Sewing kits, presented in a case of leather, fabric, plastics etc., containing, e.g.,scissors, a 
measuring tape, a needle threader, sewing needles and sewing thread, sayft pins, a 
thimble, buttons and presS-studs. 

(3) Shoe-cleaning kits, presented in a case of leather, fabric, plastics, cardboard covered with 
plastics, etc.,containing e.g., brushes, a tin or tube of polish and a fabric cleaning cloth. 

The heading excludes manicure s ts (heading 82.14). 

This heading also excludes sets distributed by airlines to passengers (during their flight or at their 
destination if their baggage is not available), consisting of fabric bags containing articles of the type listed 
in Items (1) to (3) above, cosmetws, perfumery or toilet articles, handkerchiefs of cellulose wadding, but 
also made up textile articles such I as pyjamas, T-shirts, trousers, shorts, etc. The articles of these sets are 
classifiable according to their own appropriate heading. 

XX-9605-1 



96.06 

96.06 - Buttons, press-fasteners, snap-fasteners and press-studs, button moulds and other 
parts of these articles; button blanks. 

9606.10 - Press-fasteners, snap-fasteners and press-studs and parts therefor 

- Buttons : 

9606.21 - - Of plastics, not covered with textile material 

9606.22 - - Of base metal, not covered with textile material 

9606.29 - - Other 

9606.30 - Button moulds and other parts of buttons; button blanks 

This heading covers buttons, studs, and similar articles used for fastening or decorating articles 
of apparel, household linen, etc. These articles may be made of various materials and they may 
contain natural or culturedpearls, precious or semi-precious stones (natural, synthetic or 
reconstructed), precious metal or metal clad with precious metal provided these latter materials 
are present as minor components only. Otherwise they fall in Chapter 71. 

The principal materials used for making buttons, studs, etc., are base metals, wood, corozo, 
dom, bone, horn, plastics, ceramics, glass, ebonite, compressed paperboard, leather, 
composition leather, ivory, tortoise-shell or mother-of-pearl. They may also consist of 
combinations of these materials and may be textile covered. 

The heading includes : 

(A) Pierced and shank buttons. These may be of various sizes and shapes according to the 
purpose for which they are to be used (underwear, outer garments, footwear, etc.). 

Spherical buttons may be distinguished from beads by the fact that the hole for the thread is 
not pierced centrally. 

In some shank buttons, the shank is in the form of a spring-type hinge which enables the 
button to be secured to a garment without sewing. Other types (e.g., "bachelor buttons") are 
affixed to garments by a snap mechanism. 

(B) Press-fasteners, snap-fasteners and press-studs. These consist of two or more parts, and 
operate by means of a snap mechanism. Such fasteners and studs may be designed for 
sewing on garments, etc., or they may be attached by "riveting" (e.g., press-studs for 
gloves). 

Press-fasteners and the like remain classified in this heading when the separate parts are 
supplied already mounted on strips of narrow tape. 

The heading also covers : 

(1) Button moulds. These articles are the interior part or "body" of certain types of buttons, 
and are designed to be covered with textile material, paper, leather, etc. They are classified 
here only when clearly recognisable as designed for button manufacture. These moulds 
may be of wood, orris root, etc., but the most usual type consists of two metal parts, one of 
which is covered with textile, etc., while the other fits into the first and holds the textile in 
place. 

XX-9606-1 



96.06 • 
(2) Other parts of buttons, etc., identifiable as such (e.g., shanks, bases, heads). 

(3) Button blanks. These include : 

(i) Moulded blanks as obtained from the mould and not yet usable as buttons. They 
normally require to be trimmed, pierced and polished, but are readily distinguishable 
as being intended foi. manufacture into buttons. 

(ii) Stamped metal blanks consisting of two parts (top and base) designed to fit one into 
the other. 

(iii) Blanks of mother-4f-pearl, corozo, wood, etc., worked (e.g., rounded or hollowed 
out on one or both sides or otherwise shaped, with rimmed edges, polished or pierced) 
so that they are clearly identifiable as intended for making buttons. On the other 
hand, a disc merelysawn, cut or polished, but not further worked, is not regarded as a 
button blank and is to be classified according to the constituent material. 

The heading excludes cuff-links cheading 71.13 or 71.17). 

XX-9606-2 



• 96.07 

96.07 - Slide fasteners and parts thereof. 

- Slide fasteners : 

9607.11 - - Fitted with chain scoops of base metal 

9607.19 - - Other 

9607.20 - Parts 

This heading covers : 

(1) Slide fasteners of any size and for any purpose (for clothing, footwear, travel goods, etc.). 

Most slide fasteners consist of two narrow strips of textile material one edge of each strip 
being fitted with scoops (of metal, plastics, etc.), which can be made to interlock by means 
of a slider or runner. Another type of slide fastener consists of two strips of plastics, each 
with a specially shaped edge designed to interlock one with the other under the action of a 
slider. 

(2) Parts of slide fasteners, e.g., chain scoops, sliders or runners, end pieces, and narrow 

III strips of any length mounted with chain scoops. 

XX-9607-1 



96.08 

96.08 - Ball point pens; felt tipped and other porous-tipped pens and markers; fountain 
pens, stylograph pens and other pens; duplicating stylos; propelling or sliding 
pencils; pen-holders,, pencil-holders and similar holders; parts (including caps and 
clips) of the foregoing articles, other than those of heading 96.09. 

9608.10 - Ball point pens 

9608.20 - Felt tipped and other porous-tipped pens and markers 

9608.30 - Fountain pins, stylograph pens and other pens 

9608.40 - Propelling hr sliding pencils 

9608.50 - Sets of articles from two or more of the foregoing subheadings 

9608.60 - Refills for ball point pens, comprising the ball point and ink-reservoir 

- Other : 

9608.91 - - Pen nibs nd nib points 

9608.99 - - Other 

This heading covers : 

(1) Ball point pens. These g erally consist of a body enclosing a tube of ink terminated by a 
ball. 

(2)  Felt tipped and other porous-tipped pens and markers, including those of the fountain 
pen type. 

(3)  Fountain pens, stylograph pens and other pens (pump, cartridge, plunger, vacuum, etc.), 
whether or not fitted with pen nibs or points. 

(4)  Duplicating stylos. 

(5)  Propelling pencils or sliding pencils, single or multilead type; including the spare leads 
normally contained therein. 

(6)  Pen-holders, whether or not in one piece, and with or without nibs or caps. 

(7)  Pencil-holders and similar holders (e.g., holders for crayons, drawing charcoals). 

PARTS 
The heading also covers identifiable parts not more specifically included elsewhere in the 
Nomenclature. For example : 

XX-9608-1 



• 96.08 

Pen nibs of any design including unfinished nibs roughly cut to shape; clips; refills for ball point 
pens, comprising the ball point and the ink reservoir; holders for the ball points or felts of 
marking stylographs; ink-flow regulators; barrels for pens or pencils of this heading; filling or 
propelling mechanisms; ink sacs of rubber or other materials; point protectors; interchangeable 
renew nib units comprising nib, feed and collar; nib points (or pen points) which are small balls 
made from platinum alloys or from certain tungsten alloys used for pointing the tips of pen nibs 
to prevent premature wear. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Ink cartridges for fountain pens (heading 32.15). 

(b) Steel balls for ball point pens and pencils (heading 73.26 or 84.82). 

(c) Mathematical drawing pens (heading 90.17). 

(d) Pencil leads (heading 96.09). 

)0C-9608-2 



96.09 • 
96.09 - Pencils (other than pencils of heading 96.08), crayons, pencil leads, pastels, drawing 

charcoals, writing or drawing chalks and tailors' chalks. 

9609.10 - Pencils and crayons, with leads encased in a rigid sheath 

9609.20 - Pencil leads, black or coloured 

9609.90 - Other 

The articles of this heading are of two types : 

(A) Those without any covering or simply covered with a protective band of paper (e.g., chalks, 
drawing charcoals, pencil leads, certain crayons, pastels, and slate pencils). 

(B) Pencils and crayons, with leads encased in wood or plastics or in some cases in a sheath 
composed of layers of parer. 

The composition of pencil leads, chalks, pastels and crayons, etc., varies according to their 
intended use. 

The heading includes : 

(1)  Slate pencils of natural or agglomerated slate. 

(2)  Natural chalks in the form of sticks (obtained by sawing or cutting). 

(3)  Prepared chalks, usually made with a basis of calcium sulphate or of calcium sulphate and 
calcium carbonate, sometimes mixed with colouring matter. 

Drawing charcoals, obtained usually by calcining spindle-tree wood. 

Crayons and pastels, usually made of a mixture of chalk or clay, colouring matter, shellac 
or wax, spirit and turpentiir. 

Pencils and crayons, with leads encased in a rigid sheath. 

Pencil leads (e.g., black leads, composed of a mixture of graphite and clay; coloured leads, 
consisting of metallic oxides or other mineral pigments combined with clay, chalk or wax; 
indelible or copying leads, composed of clay tinted with a dye, such as aniline or fuchsine). 

Litho-crayons, with a basis of lamp black, wax, soap and tallow. 

"Ceramic" crayons, with a basis of vitrifiable colours, fats, cocoa butter, wax, etc. 

The heading includes pencils incorporating erasers or other fittings. 

It also covers tailors' chalks (which are composed of steatite). 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Chalk in the crude state (headi g 25.09). 

(b) Medicinal pencils (e.g., anti-m grain) (heading 30.04). 

(c) Pencils for cosmetic or toilet uses (e.g., eyebrow pencils, styptic pencils) (heading 33.04 or 33.07). 

(d) Billiard chalks (heading 95.04). 

XX-9609-1 



• 96.10 

96.10 - Slates and boards, with writing or drawing surfaces, whether or not framed. 

This heading covers slates and boards, clearly designed to be used for writing or drawing with 
slate .pencils, chalks, felt or fibre tipped markers (e.g., school children's slates, blackboards and 
certain notice boards). 

These articles, framed or not, may be of slate, including agglomerated slate, or may consist of 
any material (wood, paperboard, textile material, asbestos cement, etc.) covered on one or both 
sides with a preparation of powdered slate or any other coating suitable for writing on, or 
sheeting of plastics. 

Boards or slates may bear permanent markings (lines, squares, lists of commodities, etc.) and 
may incorporate counting frames. 

This heading does not cover writing or drawing slates which are not ready for use (heading 25.14 
or 68.03). 

XX-9610-1 



96.11 • 
96.11 - Date, sealing or nu bering stamps, and the like (including devices for printing or 

embossing labels), d signed for operating in the hand; hand-operated composing 
sticks, and hand printing sets incorporating such composing sticks. 

This heading covers date, sealing and similar stamps and composing sticks, provided they are 
of a type designed to be used independently in the hand. (Date, sealing and similar stamps 
incorporating a base for fixing on a table, desk, etc., or designed for operating on a stand are 
excluded - see the Explanatory Note to heading 84.72.) 

These articles include : 

(1) Seals for use with sealing wax, with or without design and whether or not provided with 
handles. 

(2) Stamps of all kinds, wit or without the printing band or self-inking device; for example, 
date stamps, multiformu a stamps, docketing and ticketing stamps, numbering stamps 
(self-changing or not), r ller stamps, pocket stamps (usually consisting of a stamp and 
ink-pad in a protective case). 

(3) Composing or setting sticks for receiving interchangeable characters. Some sticks may 
bear a permanent text or design (e.g., post office composing or setting sticks in which only 
the date is changed). • 

(4) Small hand printing set (not being toys) consisting of a box containing a hand-operated 
composing or setting stic , interchangeable characters, tweezers and an ink-pad. 

(5) Hand-operated devices for stamping tickets with a date or other characters, even if 
incorporating a punch. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Plombing and sealing pliers, and animal marking pliers (heading 82.03). 

(b) Branding irons and marking pUnches (heading 82.05). 

(c) Unmounted letters, figures or, other characters of a kind used in printing machines (heading 84.42). 
Other types of unmounted characters are classified according to the constituent material. 

(d) Hand-operated stamps incorprating a base plate for dry relief printing (heading 84.72). 

(e) Apparatus with clock movements for stamping a record of the time, e.g., of the receipt of a letter 
(heading 91.06). 

• 

• 
XX-9611-1 



• 96.12 

96.12 - Typewriter or similar ribbons, inked or otherwise prepared for giving impressions, 
whether or not on spools or in cartridges; ink-pads, whether or not inked, with or 
without boxes. 

9612.10 - Ribbons 

9612.20 - Ink-pads 

This heading covers : 

(1) Ribbons, whether or not on spools or in cartridges, for typewriters, calculating machines, 
or for any other machines incorporating a device for printing by means of such ribbons 
(automatic balances, tabulating machines, teleprinters, etc.). 

The heading also includes inked, etc., ribbons, usually having metal fixing fittings, used in 
barographs, thermographs, etc., to print and record the movement of the recording machine 
needle. 

• These ribbons are usually of woven textiles, but sometimes they are made of plastics or 
paper. To fall in the heading, they must have been inked or otherwise prepared to give 
impressions (e.g., impregnation of textile ribbons, or coating of plastics strip or paper with 
colouring matter, ink, etc.). 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Rolls of carbon or other copying paper strip, not suitable for use as typewriter, etc., ribbons, but 
designed to produce duplicate copies in accounting machines, cash registers, etc. This strip, 
which is usually much wider than typewriter ribbons (generally more than 3 cm in width), falls 
in Chapter 48. 

(b) Ribbons not prepared by inking, impregnation, coating, etc., to give an impression; these are 
classified in Chapter 39, Section XI, etc., according to the constituent material. 

(c) Empty spools (classified according to their constituent material). 

(2) Ink-pads, whether or not inked, for date stamps, etc. They are generally composed of 
felt, woven fabric or other absorbent material on a wooden, metallic or plastic support 
which is often in the form of a box. 

Hand-operated ink-rollers are excluded from this heading and are classified according to their 
constituent material. 

XX-9612-1 



96.13 • 
96.13 - Cigarette lighters anti other lighters, whether or not mechanical or electrical, and 

parts thereof other than flints and wicks. 

9613.10 - Pocket lighters, gas fuelled, non-refillable 

9613.20 - Pocket lighters, gas fuelled, refillable 

9613.80 - Other light rs 

9613.90 - Parts 

This heading includes : 

(1) Mechanical lighters. 

These produce sparks, usually by means of a wheel with a milled-edge which is revolved in 
contact with a "flint" (generally of ferro-cerium alloy). 

(2) Electrical lighters. 

Current from the mains or a battery produces a spark, or in certain types, a glowing heat in 
an electric resistor. • 

(3)  Chemical lighters. 

In these a catalyst (usually sponge platinum) is made to glow by catalytic action in the 
presence of a gas. 

(4) Non-mechanical lighters. 

One type consists of a container incorporating a fuel reservoir, and a small removable 
metal rod (the striker) fitted with a steel tip. The striking of the steel tip on a "flint" fixed 
on the outside of the container produces a spark which ignites an inflammable material near 
the tip of the striker. 

The lighters classified in this heading may be of the pocket or table types, or may be designed 
for fixing on the wall, fitting to as stoves, etc. The heading also includes lighters for motor cars 
or other vehicles. 

Lighters combined with other Objects (e.g., cigarette cases, powder cases, watches generally 
with digital faces, electronic calculators) are classified in accordance with the General 
Interpretative Rules. 

The heading also includes identifiable parts of lighters (e.g., outer casings, milled-edged wheels, 
empty or full fuel reservoirs). 

The heading does not cover ignit0s of heading 36.03, flints (heading 36.06), wicks (heading 59.08 
or 70.19) or fuel in containers (ampoules, bottles, cans, etc.) of a kind used for filling or refilling cigarette 
or similar lighters (generally heath i 36.06). 

XX-9613-1 



96.14 

96.14 - Smoking pipes (including pipe bowls) and cigar or cigarette holders, and parts 
thereof. 

This heading covers : 

(1) Smoking pipes of all kinds (including calumets, chibouks or Turkish pipes, hookahs, etc.). 

(2) Pipe bowls. 

(3) Cigar and cigarette holders. 

(4) Blocks of wood or briar root roughly shaped for the manufacture of pipes. 

The materials most commonly used in the manufacture of these articles (or of stems, 
mouthpieces or other parts) are terra-cotta and other ceramics, wood (box, cherry, etc.), briar 
root, amber, meerschaum, copal, ivory, mother-of-pearl, ebonite, steatite and clay. 

The heading also includes the following parts : stems and mouthpieces for pipes; pipe-lids; 
absorbent pipe bowls; liners; inner parts (including filter cartridges), etc. 

The heading does not apply to accessories (e.g., pipe-scrapers and pipe-cleaners); these fall in their own 
appropriate headings. 

XX-9614-1 



96.15 

96.15 - Combs, hair-slides and the like; hair pins, curling pins, curling grips, hair-curlers 
and the like, other than those of heading 85.16, and parts thereof. 

- Combs, hair-slides and the like : 

9615.11 - - Of hard rubber or plastics 

9615.19 - - Other 

9615.90 - Other 

This heading covers : 

(1) Toilet combs of all kinds, including combs for animals. 

(2) Dress combs of all kinds, whether for personal adornment or for keeping the hair in place. 

(3) Hair-slides and the like fi:or holding the hair in place or for ornamental purposes. 

These articles are usually made o;)f plastics, ivory, bone, horn, tortoise-shell, metal, etc. 

(4) Hairpins. 

(5) Curling pins, curling grips, hair-curlers and the like, other than those of 
heading 85.16, whether oar not having coverings or fittings of textile, rubber or other 
materials. 

These articles are usually made of base metal or plastics. 

They fall in Chapter 71 if containing precious metal or metal clad with precious metal, natural or 
cultured pearls, precious or semiprecious stones (natural, synthetic or reconstructed), other than as 
minor constituents. 

This heading excludes textile headlands (Section XI). 

XX-9615-1 



96.16 

96.16 - Scent sprays and similar toilet sprays, and mounts and heads therefor; powder-puffs 
and pads for the application of cosmetics or toilet preparations. 

9616.10 - Scent sprays and similar toilet sprays, and mounts and heads therefor 

9616.20 - Powder-puffs and pads for the application of cosmetics or toilet preparations 

This heading covers : 

(1) Scent, brilliantine and similar toilet sprays, whether of the table or pocket type, and 
whether for personal or professional use. They consist of a reservoir, generally in the form 
of a bottle (of glass, plastics, metal or other material), to which is fixed the mount; this 
mount incorporates the head (with its spray-forming mechanism) and a pneumatic pressure 
bulb (sometimes enclosed in a textile net) or a piston device. 

(2) Mounts for toilet sprays. 

(3) Head-pieces for toilet sprays. 

(4) Powder-puffs and pads for applying any kind of cosmetic or toilet preparation 
(face-powder, rouge, talcum-powder, etc.). They may be made of any material (swan's or 
eider-down, skin, animal hair, pile fabrics, foam rubber, etc.), and they remain in this 
heading whether or not they have handles or trimmings of ivory, tortoise-shell, bone, 
plastics, base metal, precious metal or metal clad with precious metal. 

The heading does not apply to : 

(a) Reservoirs (bottles, flasks, etc.) for scent sprays, presented separately (classified according to 
constituent material). 

(b) Rubber bulbs (heading 40.14). 

(c) Dispersing or spraying appliances of heading 84.24. 

(d) Scent spraying machines of heading 84.76. 

XX-9616-1 



96.17 • 
96.17 - Vacuum flasks and Other vacuum vessels, complete with cases; parts thereof other 

than glass inners. 

This heading covers : 

(1) Vacuum flasks and other similar vacuum vessels, provided they are complete. This 
group includes vacuum jars, jugs, carafes, etc., designed to keep liquids, food or other 
products at fairly constant temperature, for reasonable periods of time. These articles 
usually consist of a double walled receptacle (the inner), generally of glass, with a vacuum 
created between the walls, and a protective outer casing of metal, plastics or other material, 
sometimes covered with paper, leather, leathercloth, etc. The space between the vacuum 
container and the outer ca-sing	may be packed with insulating material (glass fibre, cork or 
felt). The heading also includes double-walled stainless steel vacuum insulated thermal 
flasks without a protective outer case, which perform temperature retention. In the case of 
vacuum flasks the lid can Often be used as a cup. 

(2) Outer cases, lids and caps of metal, plastics, etc., for vacuum flasks or other vacuum 
vessels. 

The heading does not cover separate glass inners (heading 70.20). • 

• 

• 
XX-9617-1 



• 96.18 

96.18 - Tailors' dummies and other lay figures; automata and other animated displays used 
for shop window dressing. 

This heading covers : 

(1) Tailors' and dressmakers' dummies. 

These are models of the human body used to obtain the correct fitting of clothing during 
making-up; generally, they represent only the trunk of the human form. They are usually 
moulded from papier mache, plaster, plastics, etc., but some are made from certain plaiting 
materials such as cane, reeds or willow. The moulded forms are usually covered with 
textile material, and are generally mounted on a stand so that the height of the model from 
the ground can be varied. 

(2) Other lay figures and similar articles. 

These are representations of the human body or parts of the human body (e.g., head, trunk, 

• legs, arms or hands), used to display articles of clothing, headgear, stockings, gloves, etc. 
These figures, etc., are made from the materials mentioned at (1) above. In the case of 
those representing the complete human form, the limbs are usually articulated so that the 
forms may be made to assume various positions. These figures are also used as models by 
artists and sculptors, and by medical students for practising methods of applying bandages, 
splints, etc. 

This category does not include silhouette or profile shapes of figures which, though sometimes used 
for displaying goods, are more frequently used as direction sips. These articles are usually made of 
wood, paperboard or metal and are classified according to their constituent material. 

(3) Automata and other animated displays used for shop window dressing. 

These range from animated representations of humans or animals to numerous other 
automatically operating appliances of a kind used for displaying merchandise or for 
publicity purposes. They may be of any material, and are generally electrically or 
mechanically operated. Though frequently objects of curiosity in themselves, these articles 
are mainly intended to serve as novel methods of attracting attention to displays of goods 
or to particular articles exhibited in shop windows. They may be designed in various forms 
according to the nature of the merchandise or service to be advertised; they serve not only 
as an attractive means of presentation, but also in certain cases to illustrate by suitable 
movements the quality, met-h od	of operation, etc., of the articles displayed. 

This heading does not include : 

(a) Apparatus or models, designed solely for demonstrational purposes, of heading 90.23. 

(b) Dolls and toys (Chapter 95). 

XX-9618-1 



96.19 • 
96.19 - Sanitary towels (pads) and tampons, napkins and napkin liners for babies and 

similar articles, of ani material. 

This heading covers sanitary towels (pads) and tampons, napkins (diapers) and napkin liners for 
babies and similar articles, including absorbent hygienic. nursing pads, napkins (diapers) for 
adults with incontinence and pantyliners, of any material. 

I 
In general, the articles of this , heading are disposable. Many of these articles are composed of 
(a) an inner layer (e.g., of nonwovens) designed to wick fluid from the wearer's skin and 
thereby prevent chafing; (b) an absorbent core for collecting and storing fluid until the product 
can be disposed of; and (c) an outer layer (e.g., of plastics) to prevent leakage of fluid from the 
absorbent core. The articles of this heading are usually shaped so that they may fit snugly to the 
human body. This heading also includes similar traditional articles made up solely of textile 
materials, which are usually reusable following laundering. 

This heading does not cover pro ucts such as disposable surgical drapes and absorbent pads for hospital 
beds, operating tables and wheel hairs or non-absorbent nursing pads or other non-absorbent articles (in 
general, classified according to thcir constituent material). 

XX-9619-1 



• 96.20 

96.20 - Monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles. 

This heading covers monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles, which are used as support 
for cameras, video cameras, precision instruments, etc., to reduce random movements. They 
may be extendable and are usually portable and may be equipped with a quick release device or 
head for easy mounting and release of the apparatus or instrument they support. These articles 
can be made of any material, e.g., wood, aluminium, carbon or a combination thereof. 

A monopod is a one-legged support, sometimes called a "unipod". A bipod is a two-legged 
support for providing stability along two axes of motion. A tripod is a three-legged stand, which 
provides significant stability for the device it supports. 

For the purpose of this heading, the expression "similar articles" refers to devices with four or 
more legs, which have the same function as monopods, bipods and tripods in reducing random 
movements. Selfie pods, also known as "selfie sticks", designed to be held in the hand, rather 
than to stand on the ground, to take self-portraits ("selfies') by positioning a smartphone, a 
photographic camera, a digital camera or a video camera recorder in an adjustable holder at the 

• end of the stick, are also included in the heading, whether or not they are equipped with wired or 
wireless remote control for picture taking. 

The heading does not cover : 

(a) Stands for microphones (heading 85.18). 

(b) Stands for holding an instrument (e.g., side-drums or saxophones) (heading 92.09). 

(c) Monopods, bipods, tripods and similar articles specially designed to be used with articles 
of Chapter 93. 

XX-9620-1 



• 

• 

• 



• XXI 

Section XXI 

WORKS OF ART, COLLECTORS' PIECES AND ANTIQUES 

XXI-1 



• 

• 

• 



• 97 

Chapter 97 

Works of art, collectors' pieces and antiques 

Notes. 

1.- This Chapter does not cover : 

(a) Unused postage or revenue stamps, postal stationery (stamped paper) or the like, of 
heading 49.07; 

(b) Theatrical scenery, studio back-cloths or the like, of painted canvas (heading 59.07) except if 
they may be classified in heading 97.06; or 

(c) Pearls, natural or cultured, or precious or semi-precious stones (headings 71.01 to 71.03). 

2.- For the purposes of heading 97.02, the expression "original engravings, prints and lithographs" means 
impressions produced directly, in black and white or in colour, of one or of several plates wholly 
executed by hand by the artist, irrespective of the process or of the material employed by him, but not 
including any mechanical or photomechanical process. 

3.- Heading 97.03 does not apply to mass-produced reproductions or works of conventional 
craftsmanship of a commercial character, even if these articles are designed or created by artists. 

4.- (A) Subject to Notes 1 to 3 above, articles of this Chapter are to be classified in this Chapter and not 
in any other Chapter of the Nomenclature. 

(B) Heading 97.06 does not apply to articles of the preceding headings of this Chapter. 

5.- Frames around paintings, drawings, pastels, collages or similar decorative plaques, engravings, prints 
or lithographs are to be classified with those articles, provided they are of a kind and of a value 
normal to those articles. Frames which are not of a kind or of a value normal to the articles referred to 
in this Note are to be classified separately. 

GENERAL 
This Chapter covers : 

(A) Certain works of art : paintings, drawings and pastels, executed entirely by hand, and 
collages and similar decorative plaques (heading 97.01); original engravings, prints and 
lithographs (heading 97.02); original sculptures and statuary (heading 97.03). 

(B) Postage or revenue and similar stamps, stamp-postmarks, first-day covers, postal stationery 
(stamped paper) and the like, used or unused, other than those of heading 49.07 
(heading 97.04). 

(C) Collections and collectors' pieces of zoological, botanical, mineralogical, anatomical, 
historical, archaeological, palaeontological, ethnographic or numismatic interest 
(heading 97.05). 

(D) Antiques of an age exceeding 100 years (heading 97.06). 

It should, however, be noted that such articles are classified in other Chapters of the Nomenclature if 
they do not comply with the conditions arising from the terms of the Notes or headings of this Chapter. 

Articles of a kind described in headings 97.01 to 97.05 remain classified in those headings even 
if they are of an age exceeding 100 years. 

XXI-97-1 



97.01 • 
97.01 - Paintings, drawingsand pastels, executed entirely by hand, other than drawings of 

heading 49.06 and other than hand-painted or hand-decorated manufactured 
articles; collages and similar decorative plaques. 

9701.10 - Paintings, drawings and pastels 

9701.90 - Other 

(A) PAINTINGS, DRAWINGS AND PASTELS, EXECUTED ENTIRELY 
BY HAND, OTHER THAN DRAWINGS OF HEADING 49.06 AND 

OTHER THAN HAND-PAINTED OR HAND- 
DECORATED MANUFACTURED ARTICLES 

This group covers paintings, drawings and pastels (whether ancient or modern), executed 
entirely by hand. These works may take the form of oil paintings, wax paintings, tempera 
paintings, acrylic paintings, water-colours, gouache paintings, pastels, miniatures, illuminated 
manuscripts, pencil drawings (including Conte drawings), charcoal or pen drawings, etc., 
executed on any material. 

As these works must be executed entirely by hand, articles obtained wholly or partly by any 
other process are excluded, Or example, paintings, whether or not on canvas, obtained by 
photomechanical processes; paintings executed by hand on an outline or on a drawing obtained 
by ordinary engraving or printing processes; so-called "authentic copies" of paintings, obtained 
by means of a number of masks or stencils, even if these copies are certified authentic by the 
artist. 

However, copies of paintings remain in this group irrespective of their artistic value, if they are 
executed entirely by hand. 

This group also excludes : 

(a) Plans and drawings, for industrial, architectural or engineering purposes, being originals drawn by 
hand (heading 49.06). 

(b) Designs or drawings for fashion models, jewellery, wallpaper, fabrics, furniture, etc., being originals 
drawn by hand (heading 49.06). 

(c) Theatrical scenery, studio back-cloths or the like, of painted canvas (heading 59.07 or 97.06). 

(d) Hand-decorated manufactured articles such as wall coverings consisting of hand-painted woven 
fabrics, holiday souvenirs, bdxes and caskets, ceramic wares (plates, dishes, vases, etc.), these are 
classified under their own apptopriate headings. 

(B) COLLAGES AND SIMILAR DECORATIVE PLAQUES 

This group covers collages and similar decorative plaques, consisting of bits and pieces of 
various animal, vegetable or other materials, assembled so as to form a picture or decorative 
design or motif and glued or otherwise mounted on a backing, e.g., of wood, paper or textile 
material. The backing may beplain or it may be hand-painted or imprinted with decorative or 
pictorial elements which form part of the overall design. Collages range in quality from articles 
cheaply produced in quantity for sale as souvenirs up to products which require a high degree of 
craftsmanship and which may b genuine works of art. 

For the purpose of this group, the term "similar decorative plaques" does not include articles consisting 
of a single piece of material, even if mounted or glued on a backing, which are more specifically covered 
by other headings of the Nomenclare such as "ornaments" of plastics, of wood, of base metal, etc. Such 
articles are classified in their appropriate headings (headings 44.20, 83.06, etc.). 

XXI-970 1-1 



• 97.01 

Frames around paintings, drawings, pastels, collages or similar decorative plaques are to be 
classified with those articles in this heading, only if they are of a kind and of a value normal to 
those articles; in other cases the frames are to be classified separately in their appropriate 
headings as articles of wood, metal, etc. (see Note 5 to this Chapter). 

XXI-9701-2 



97.02 

97.02 - Original engravings, prints and lithographs. 

This heading covers original engravings, prints and lithographs (whether ancient or modern), 
i.e., impressions produced directly, in black and white or in colour, from one or several plates 
wholly executed by hand byhteartist, irrespective of the process or of the material employed by 
him, but excluding any mechanical or photomechanical process (see Note 2 to this Chapter). 

Provided, they satisfy the other conditions of the preceding paragraph, the heading includes, as 
original works, lithographs executed by the transfer technique (in which the lithographic artist 
first makes his drawing on a special paper and then transfers the design to the stone). 

The impressions as defined above are produced from engraved plates which may have been 
executed by various processes, e.g., line-engraving, dry-point, aquatint (acid process) or 
stipple-engraving. 

Original impressions remain irl this heading even if they have been retouched. 

It is often difficult to distinguish the original article from the copy, fake or reproduction, but the 
relatively small number of impressions and the quality of the paper may be useful guides in 
determining originals; on the other hand, evidence of the use of half-tone screens (in 
photogravure and heliogravure) and, very often, the absence of the mark left on the paper by the 
plate, may indicate a copy or a reproduction. 

Frames around engravings, prints or lithographs are to be classified with those articles in this 
heading, only if they are of a kind and of a value normal to those articles; in other cases the 
frames are to be classified separately in their appropriate headings as articles of wood, metal, 
etc. (see Note 5 to this Chapter). 

It should be noted that the headinexcludes the plates (in copper, zinc, stone, wood or any other material) 
from which engravings, etc., are made (heading 84.42). 

XXI-9702-1 



97.03 

97.03 - Original sculptures and statuary, in any material. 
This heading covers original sculptures and statuary, ancient or modern. They may be in any 
material (stone, reconstituted stone, terra-cotta, wood, ivory, metal, wax, etc.), in the round, in 
relief or in intaglio (statues, busts, figurines, groups, representations of animals, etc., including 
reliefs for architectural purposes). 
These works may be produced by various processes including the following : in one of these the 
artist carves the work directly from hard materials; in another the artist models soft materials 
into figures; these are then cast in bronze or in plaster, or are fired or otherwise hardened, or 
they may be reproduced by the artist in marble or in other hard materials. 

In the latter process, the artist usually proceeds on the following lines : 

He begins by roughing out his idea as a model, also known as a maquette, (usually on a reduced 
scale) in clay or other plastic material; with this as a basis, he then models a "clay form". This 
"clay form" is seldom sold, but is usually destroyed after it has served for moulding a very 
limited number of copies decided in advance by the artist, or it is placed in a museum for study 
purposes. These reproductions include, firstly, the "plaster model" produced directly from the 
"clay form". This "plaster model" is used either as a model for the execution of the work in 
stone or wood, or for preparing moulds for casting in metal or wax. 

The same sculpture may therefore be reproduced as two or three "copies" in marble, wood, wax, 
bronze, etc., and a few in terra-cotta or in plaster. Not only the preliminary model, but also the 
"clay form", the "plaster model" and these "copies" constitute original works of the artist; the 
copies are in fact never quite identical as the artist has intervened at each stage with additional 
modelling, corrections to casts, and for the patina imparted to each article. Only rarely does the 
total number of replicas exceed twelve. 

The heading therefore covers not only the original models made by the sculptor but also copies 
and reproductions of those models made by the second process described above, whether these 
are made by the sculptor himself or by another artist. 
The heading excludes the following articles, even if they are designed or created by artists : 

(a) Ornamental sculptures of a commercial character. 

(b) Articles of personal adornment and other works of conventional craftsmanship of a commercial 
character (ornaments, religious effigies, etc.). 

(c) Mass-produced reproductions in plaster, staff, cement, papier mache, etc. 

With the exception of articles of adornment classifiable in heading 71.16 or 71.17, all these articles are 
classified according to their constituent material (heading 44.20 for wood, heading 68.02 or 68.15 for 
stone, heading 69.13 for ceramics, heading 83.06 for base metal, etc.). 

XXI-9703-1 



97.04 

97.04 - Postage or revenue stamps, stamp-postmarks, first-day covers, postal stationery 
(stamped paper), an s the hke, used or unused, other than those of heading 49.07. 

This heading covers the following products used or unused, other than those of 
heading 49.07 : 

(A) Postage stamps of all kinds, i.e., the stamps of the kind normally used for affixing to 
correspondence or postal packages; "postage due" stamps, etc. 

(B) Revenue stamps of all kinds, i.e., receipt stamps, registration stamps, circulation permit 
stamps, consular stamps, stamped revenue bands, etc. 

(C) Stamp-postmarks, i.e., letters bearing a postmark, but no postage stamps, used before the 
introduction of postage stamps. 

(D) Postage stamps stuck GO envelopes or cards, including "first-day covers", which are 
envelopes, usually marked "first-day", bearing a postage stamp (or a set of postage stamps) 
postmarked with its date of issue, and "maximum cards". The latter are cards bearing a 
postage stamp and a reproduction of the stamp's design. The postage stamp is cancelled 
with an ordinary or special date-stamp showing the place associated with the design and the 
date of issue. 

(E) Postal stationery (stamped paper), i.e., franked envelopes, letter-cards, postcards, 
newspaper wrappers, etc. 

The articles of this heading nay be presented in bulk (separate stamps, date-stamped corners, 
complete sheets), or in collections. Albums containing collections of such articles are treated as 
forming part of the collections provided they are of a value normal to the collection. 
The heading excludes : 

(a) Maximum cards and first-day covers (whether or not illustrated) not bearing postage stamps 
(heading 48.17 or Chapter 49). 

(b) Unused postage or revenue stamps, postal stationery (stamped paper) or the like, of current or new 
issue in the country in which they have, or will have, a recognised face value (heading 49.07). 

(c) Vouchers in the form of "savings stamps" issued by private or commercial bodies to customers, and 
stamps sometimes issued by retailers to their customers as a rebate on purchases (heading 49.11). 

XXI-9704-1 



97.05 

97.05 - Collections and collectors' pieces of zoological, botanical, mineralogical, anatomical, 
historical, archaeological, palaeontological, ethnographic or numismatic interest. 

These articles are very often of little intrinsic value but derive their interest from their rarity, 
their grouping or their presentation. The heading includes : 

(A) Collections and collectors' pieces of zoological, botanical, mineralogical or anatomical 
interest, such as : 

(1) Dead animals of any species, preserved dry or in liquid; stuffed animals for collections. 

(2) Blown or sucked eggs; insects in boxes, frames, etc. (other than mounted articles 
constituting imitation jewellery or trinkets); empty shells, other than those of a kind 
suitable for industrial use. 

(3) Seeds or plants, dried or preserved in liquid; herbariums. 

(4) Specimens of minerals (not being precious or semi-precious stones falling in 
Chapter 71); specimens of petrification. 

(5) Osteological specimens (skeletons, skulls, bones). 

(6) Anatomical and pathological specimens. 

(B) Collections and collectors' pieces of historical, ethnographic, palaeontological or 
archaeological interest, for example : 

(1) Articles being the material remains of human activity suitable for the study of the 
activities of earlier generations, such as : mummies, sarcophagi, weapons, objects of 
worship, articles of apparel, articles which have belonged to famous persons. 

(2) Articles having a bearing on the study of the activities, manners, customs and 
characteristics of contemporary primitive peoples, for example, tools, weapons or 
objects of worship. 

(3) Geological specimens for the study of fossils (extinct organisms which have left their 
remains or imprints in geological strata), whether animal or vegetable. 

(C) Collections and collectors' pieces of numismatic interest. 

These are coins, banknotes which are no longer legal tender, other than those of 
heading 49.07, and medals presented as collections or as separate pieces; in the latter case, 
each consignment usually contains only a few examples of any one coin or medal, and 
these are classified here only if clearly intended for a collection. 

The heading excludes coins and medals not regarded as collectors' pieces nor forming a collection 
of numismatic interest (e.g., large consignments of any one coin or medal); these generally fall in 
Chapter 71, but any such "coins" and "medals" so battered or bent that they are fit only for 
remelting, etc. are prima facie classifiable in the headings for scrap and waste metal. 

Coins which are legal tender in the country of issue fall in heading 71.18 even if they are put up for 
general sale in presentation cases. 

XXI-9705-1 



97.05 • 
Coins or medals mounted s jewellery are excluded (Chapter 71 or heading 97.06). 

Banknotes which are no longer legal tender, and which are not regarded as collectors' pieces nor as 
forming a collection, are cliissified in heading 49.07. 

Goods produced as a commercial undertaking to commemorate, celebrate, illustrate or depict an event or 
any other matter, whether or not production is limited in quantity or circulation, do not fall in this 
heading as collections or collectors' pieces of historical or numismatic interest unless the goods 
themselves have subsequently a fined that interest by reason of their age or rarity. 

XXI-9705-2 



  

  

• 97.06 

97.06 - Antiques of an age exceeding one hundred years. 

This heading covers all antiques of an age exceeding one hundred years, provided they are not 
included in headings 97.01 to 97.05. The interest of these articles derives from their age and, as 
a general consequence, their resulting rarity. 

Subject to these conditions, the heading includes : 

(1) Antique furniture, frames and panelling. 

(2) Products of the printing industry : incunabula and other books, music, maps, engravings 
(other than those of heading 97.02). 

(3) Vases and other ceramic articles. 

(4) Textile articles : carpets, tapestries, embroidery, lace and other fabrics. 

(5) Jewellery. 

• (6) Articles of goldsmiths' or silversmiths' wares (ewers, cups, candelabra, plate, etc.). 

(7) Leaded or stained glass windows. 

(8) Chandeliers and lamps. 

(9) Ironmongers' and locksmiths' wares. 

(10) Small ornaments for glass cabinets (boxes, sweetmeat boxes, snuff boxes, tobacco graters, 
caskets, fans, etc.). 

(11) Musical instruments. 

(12) Clocks and watches. 

(13) Glyptographers' wares (cameos, carved stones) and sigillographers' wares (seals, etc.). 

Provided they retain their original character, the heading includes antique articles which have 
been repaired or restored. For example, the heading includes : antique furniture incorporating 
parts of modern manufacture (e.g., reinforcements and repairs); antique tapestries, leather or 
fabrics, mounted on modern wood. 

The heading does not cover, irrespective of their age, pearls, natural or cultured, or precious or 

• semi-precious stones of headings 71.01 to 71.03. 

• 
XXI-9706- I 



0 

• 

• 

• 



• 

• 

• 

• 



41 

• 

•